I guess you can see why Andy went a little wonky when Tommy told him that story,
and why he wanted to see the warden right away. Elwood Blatch had been serving a
six-to-twelve rap when Tommy knew him four years before. By the time Andy heard
all of this, in 1963, he might be on the verge of getting out . . . or already

out. So those were the two prongs of the spit Andy was roasting on-the idea that
Blatch might still be in on one hand, and the very real possibility that he

might be gone like the wind on the other.

There were inconsistencies in Tommy's story, but aren't there always in real

life? Blatch told Tommy the man who got sent up was a hotshot lawyer, and Andy
was a banker, but those are two professions that people who aren't very educated
could easily get mixed up. And don't forget that twelve years had gone by
between the time Blatch was reading the clippings about the trial and the time

he told the tale to Tommy Williams. He also told Tommy he got better than a
thousand dollars from a footlocker Quentin had in his closet, but the police
said at Andy's trial that there had been no sign of burglary. I have a few ideas
about that. First, if you take the cash and the man it belonged to is dead, how
are you going to know anything was stolen, unless someone else can tell you it
was there to start with? Second, who's to say Blatch wasn't lying about that
part of it? Maybe he didn't want to admit killing two people for nothing. 
Third,

maybe there were signs of burglary and the cops either overlooked them-cops can
be pretty dumb-or deliberately covered them up so they wouldn't screw the DA's
case. The guy was running for public office, remember, and he needed a

conviction to run on. An unsolved burglary-murder would have done him no good at
all.

But of the three, I like the middle one best. I've known a few Elwood Blatches
in my time at Shawshank-the trigger-pullers with the crazy eyes. Such fellows

want you to think they got away with the equivalent of the Hope Diamond on every
caper, even if they got caught with a two-dollar Timex and nine bucks on the one
they're doing time for.

And there was one thing in Tommy's story that convinced Andy beyond a shadow of
a doubt. Blatch hadn't hit Quentin at random. He had called Quentin "a big rich
prick," and he had known Quentin was a golf pro. Well, Andy and his wife had

been going out to that country club for drinks and dinner once or twice a week
for a couple of years, and Andy had done a considerable amount of drinking there
once he found out about his wife's affair. There was a marina with the country
club, and for awhile in 1947 there had been a part-time grease-and-gas jockey

working there who matched Tommy's description of Elwood Blatch. A big tall man,
mostly bald, with deep-set green eyes. A man who had an unpleasant way of
looking at you, as though he was sizing you up. He wasn't there long, Andy 
said.

Either he quit or Briggs, the fellow in charge of the marina, fired him. But he
wasn't a man you forgot. He was too striking for that.


So Andy went to see Warden Norton on a rainy, windy day with big gray clouds
scudding across the sky above the gray walls, a day when the last of the snow
was starting to melt away and show lifeless patches of last year's grass in the
fields beyond the prison.

The warden has a good-sized office in the Administration Wing, and behind the
warden's desk there's a door which connects with the assistant warden's 
office..

The assistant warden was out that day, but a trusty was there. He was a

half-lame fellow whose real name I have forgotten; all the inmates, me included,
called him Chester, after Marshal Dillon's sidekick. Chester was supposed to be
watering the plants and waxing the floor. My guess is that the plants went

thirsty that day and the only waxing that was done happened because of Chester's
dirty ear polishing the keyhole plate of that connecting door.

He heard the warden's main door open and close and then Norton saying: "Good
morning, Dufresne, how can I help you?"

"Warden," Andy began, and old Chester told us that he could hardly recognize
Andy's voice it was so changed. "Warden. . . there's something . . . something's
happened to me that's . . . that's so . . . so . . . I hardly know where to

begin."

"Well, why don't you just begin at the beginning?" the warden said, probably in
his sweetest let's-all-turn-to- the-Twenty-third- Psalm-and-read-in-unison
voice. "That usually works the best."

And so Andy did. He began by refreshing Norton on the details of the crime he

had been imprisoned for. Then he told the warden exactly what Tommy Williams had
told him. He also gave out Tommy's name, which you may think wasn't so wise in
light of later developments, but I'd just ask you what else he could have done,

if his story was to have any credibility at all.

When he had finished, Norton was completely silent for some time. I can just see
him, probably tipped back in his office chair under the picture of Governor Reed
hanging on the wall, his fingers steepled, his liver lips pursed, his brow

wrinkled into ladder rungs halfway to the crown of his head, his thirty-year pin
gleaming mellowly.

"Yes," he said finally. "That's the damnedest story I ever heard. But I'll tell
you what surprises me most about it, Dufresne."

"What's that, sir?"

"That you were taken in by it."


"Sir? I don't understand what you mean." And Chester said that Andy Dufresne,
who had faced down Byron Hadley on the plate-shop roof thirteen years before, 
was
almost floundering for words.

"Well, now," Norton said. "It's pretty obvious to me that this young fellow  
Williams is
impressed with you. Quite taken with you, as a matter of fact. He hears your 
tale of woe,
and it's quite natural of him to want to . . . cheer you up, let's say. Quite 
natural. He's a
young man, not terribly bright. Not surprising he didn't realize what a state 
it would put
you into. Now what I suggest is-"

"Don't you think I thought of that?" Andy asked. "But I'd never told Tommy 
about

the man working down at the marina. I never told anyone that-it never even 
crossed my
mind! But Tommy's description of his cellmate and that man . . . they're 
identical!"

"Well, now, you may be indulging in a little selective perception there," 
Norton

said with a chuckle. Phrases like that, selective perception, are required 
learning for people
in the penology and corrections business, and they use them all they can.

"That's not it at all. Sir."

"That's your slant on it," Norton said, "but mine differs. And let's remember 
that I have
only your word that there was such a man working at the Falmouth Hills Country 
Club
back then."

"No, sir," Andy broke in again. "No, that isn't true. Because-"

"Anyway," Norton overrode him, expansive and loud, "let's just look at it from 
the other
end of the telescope, shall we? Suppose- just suppose, now-that there really 
was a fellow
named Elwood Blotch. "

"Blatch," Andy said tightly.

"Blatch, by all means. And let's say he was Thomas William's cellmate in Rhode 
Island.
The chances are excellent that he has been released by now. Excellent. Why, we 
don't even
know how much time he might have done there before he ended up with Williams, 
do we?
Only that he was doing a six-to-twelve."

"No. We don't know how much time he'd done. But Tommy said he was a bad actor, a
cut-up. I think there's a fair chance that he may still be in. Even if he's 
been released, the
prison will have a record of his last known address, the names of his 
relatives-"

"And both would almost certainly be dead ends."

Andy was silent for a moment, and then he burst out: "Well, it's a chance, 
isn't it?"


"Yes, of course it is. So just for a moment, Dufresne, let's assume that Blatch 
exists and
that he is still safely ensconced in the Rhode Island State Penitentiary. Now 
what is he
going to say if we bring this kettle of fish to him in a bucket? Is he going to 
fall down on
his knees, roll his eyes, and say: 'I did it! I did it! By all means add a life 
term onto my
charge!'?"

"How can you be so obtuse?" Andy said, so low that Chester could barely hear. 
But he
heard the warden just fine.

"What? What did you call me?"
"Obtuse.'" Andy cried. "Is it deliberate?"

"Dufresne, you've taken five minutes of my time-no, seven- and I have a very 
busy
schedule today. So I believe we'll just declare this little meeting closed 
and-"

"The country club will have all the old time-cards, don't you realize that?" 
Andy shouted.
"They'll have tax-forms and W-twos and unemployment compensation forms, all 
with his
name on them! There will be employees there now that were there then, maybe 
Briggs
himself!  It's been fifteen years, not forever! They'll remember him! They will 
remember
Blatch.' If I've got Tommy to testify to what Blatch told him, and Briggs to 
testify that
Blatch was there, actually working at the country club, I can get a new trial! 
I can-"

"Guard! Guard.' Take this man away!"

"What's the matter with you?" Andy said, and Chester told me he was very nearly
screaming by then. "It's my life, my chance to get out, don't you see that? And 
 you won't
make    a single long-distance call to at least verify Tommy's story? Listen, 
I'll pay for the
call! I'll pay for-"

Then there was a sound of thrashing as the guards grabbed him and started to 
drag him
out.

"Solitary," Warden Norton said dryly. He was probably fingering his thirty-year 
pin as he
said it. "Bread and water."

And so they dragged Andy away, totally out of control now, still screaming at 
the warden;
Chester said you could hear him even after the door was shut: "it's my life! 
It's my life,
don't   you understand it's my life? "

Twenty days on the grain and drain train for Andy down there in solitary. It 
was his
second jolt in solitary, and his dust-up with Norton was his first real black 
mark since he
had joined our happy little family.

I'll tell you a little bit about Shawshank's solitary while we're on the 
subject. It's something
of a throwback to those hardy pioneer days of the early to mid-1700s in Maine. 
In those


days no one wasted much time with such things as "penology" and rehabilitation" 
and
"selective perception." In those days, you were taken care of in terms of 
absolute black
and    white. You were either guilty  or innocent. If you were guilty, you were 
either hung or
put in jail. And if you were sentenced to jail, you did not go to an 
institution. No, you dug
your own jail with a spade provided by the Province of Maine. You dug it as 
wide and as
deep as you could during the period between sunup and sundown. Then they gave 
you a
couple of skins and a bucket, and down you went. Once down, the gazer would bar 
the
top     of your hole, throw down some grain or maybe a piece of maggoty meat 
once or twice
a week, and maybe there would be a dipperful of  barley soup on Sunday night. 
You
pissed in the bucket, and you held up the same bucket for water when the gazer 
came
around  at six in the morning. When it rained, you used the bucket to bail out 
your jail-cell

. . . unless, that is, you wanted to drown like a rat in a rain barrel.

No one spent a long time "in the hole," as it was called; thirty months was an 
unusually
long term, and so far as I've been able to tell, the longest term ever spent 
from which an
inmate actually emerged alive was served by the so-called "Durham Boy," a 
fourteen-year-
old psychopath who castrated a schoolmate with a piece of rusty metal. He did 
seven
years, but of course he went in young and strong.

You have to remember that for a crime that was more serious than petty theft or
blasphemy or forgetting to put a snot rag in your pocket when out of doors on 
the
Sabbath,      you were hung. For low crimes such as those just mentioned and 
for others like
them, you'd do your three or six or nine months in the hole and come out 
fishbelly white,
cringing from the wide-open spaces, your eyes half blind, your teeth more than 
likely
rocking and rolling in their sockets from the scurvy, your feet crawling with 
fungus. Jolly
old Province of Maine. Yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum.

Shawshank's Solitary Wing was nowhere as bad as that . . . I guess. Things come 
in three
major degrees in the human experience, I think. There's good, bad, and 
terrible. And as
you go down into progressive darkness toward terrible, it gets harder and 
harder to make
subdivisions.

To get to Solitary Wing you were led down twenty-three steps to a basement 
level where
the only sound was the drip of water. The only light was supplied by a series 
of dangling
sixty-watt bulbs. The cells were keg-shaped, like those wall-safes rich people 
sometimes
hide behind a picture. Like a safe, the round doorways were hinged, and solid 
instead of
barred. You got ventilation from above, but no light except for your own 
sixty-watt bulb,
which was turned off from a master-switch promptly at 8:00 P.M., an hour before 
lights-
out in the rest of the prison. The light bulb wasn't in a wire mesh cage or 
anything like
that. The feeling was that if you wanted to exist down there in the dark, you 
were
welcome to it. Not many did . . . but after eight, of course, you had no 
choice. You had a
bunk bolted to the wall and a can with no toilet seat. You had three ways to 
spend your
time: sitting, shitting, or sleeping. Big choice.

Twenty days could get to seem like a year. Thirty days could seem like two, and 
forty


days like ten. Sometimes you could hear rats in the ventilation system. In a 
situation like
that, subdivisions of terrible tend to get lost.

If anything at all can be said in favor of solitary, it's just that you get 
time to think. Andy
had twenty days in which to think while he enjoyed his grain and drain, and 
when he got
out he requested another meeting with the warden. Request denied. Such a 
meeting, the
warden told him, would be "counter-productive." That's another of those phrases 
you have
to master before you can go to work in the prisons and corrections held.

Patiently, Andy renewed his request. And renewed it. And renewed it. He had 
changed,
had Andy Dufresne. Suddenly, as that spring of 1963 bloomed around us, there 
were lines
in his face and sprigs of gray showing in his hair. He had lost that little 
trace of a smile that
always seemed to linger around his mouth. His eyes stared out into space more 
often, and
you get to know that when a man stares that way, he is counting up the years 
served, the
months, the weeks, the days.
