That's what I know; now I'm going to tell you what I think I may have it wrong
on some of the specifics, but I'd be willing to let my watch and chain that I've
got the general outline down pretty well. Because, with Andy being the sort of

man that he was, there's only one or two ways that it could have been. And every
now ad then, when I think it out, I think of Normaden, that half-crazy Indian.
"Nice Della," Normaden had said after celling with Andy for eight months. "I was
glad to go, me. Bad draft in that cell. All the time cold. He don't let nobody
touch his things. That's okay. Nice man, never made fun. But big draft."

Poor crazy Normaden. be knew more than all the rest of us, and he knew it 
sooner. And
it was eight long months before Andy could get him out of there and have the

cell to himself again. If it hadn't been for the eight months Normaden had spent
with him after Warden Norton first came in. I do believe that Andy would have
been free before Nixon resigned.

I believe now that it began in 1949, way back then - not with the rock-hammer, 
but
with the Rita Hayworth poster.  I told you how nervous he seemed when he asked
for that, nervous and filled with suppressed excitement.  At the time I thought

it was just embarrassment, that Andy was the sort of guy who'd never want
someone else to know that he had feet of clay and wanted a woman . . .
especially       if it was a fantasy-woman.  But I think now that I was wrong. 
I think
now that Andy's excitement came from something else altogether.

What was responsible for the hole that Warden Norton eventually found behind the
poster of a girl that hadn't even been born when that photo of Rita Hayworth was
taken?  Andy Dufresne's perseverance and hard work, yeah - I don't take any of 
that


away from him.  But there were two other elements in the equation: a lot of 
luck,
and WPA concrete.

You don't need me to explain the luck, I guess. The WPA concrete I checked out
for myself. I invested some time and a couple of stamps and wrote first to the
University of Maine History Department and then to a fellow whose address they
were able to give me. This fellow had been foreman of the WPA project that built
the Shawshank Max Security Wing.

The wing, which contains Cellblocks 3, 4, and 5, was built in the years 1934-37.
Now, most people don't think of cement and concrete as "technological
developments," the way we think of cars and oil furnaces and rocket-ships, but
they          really are. There was no modern cement until 1870 or so, and no 
modern
concrete until after the turn of the century. Mixing concrete is as delicate a
business    as making bread. You can get it too watery or not watery enough. You
can get the sand-mix too thick or too thin, and the same is true of the

gravel-mix. And back in 1934, the science of mixing the stuff was a lot less
sophisticated than it is today.

The walls of Cellblock 5 were solid enough, but they weren't exactly dry and
toasty. As a matter or fact, they were and are pretty damned dank. After a long
wet spell they would sweat and sometimes even drip. Cracks had a way of
appearing, some an inch deep. They were routinely mortared over.

Now here comes Andy Dufresne into Cellblock 5. He's a man who graduated from the
University of Maine's school of business, but he's also a man who took two or

three geology courses along the E way. Geology had, in fact, become his chief
hobby. I imagine it appealed to his patient, meticulous nature. A

ten-thousand-year ice age here. A million years of mountain-building there.
Plates of bedrock grinding against each other deep under the earth's skin over
the millennia. Pressure. Andy told me once that all of geology is the study of
pressure.

And time, of course. He had time to study those walls.  Plenty of time. When 
the cell door
slams and the lights go out, there's nothing else to look at.

First-timers usually have a hard time adjusting to the confinement of prison
life. They get screw-fever. Sometimes they have to be hauled down to the
infirmary and sedated a couple of times before they get on the beam. It's not

unusual to hear some new member of our happy little family banging on the bars
of his cell and screaming to be let out . . . and before the cries have gone on

for long, the chant starts up along the cellblock: "Fresh fish, hey little
fishie, fresh fish, fresh fish, got fresh fish today!"

Andy didn't flip out like that when he came to The Shank in 1948, but that's 
not


to say that he didn't feel many of the same things. He may have come close to
madness; some do, and some go sailing right over the edge. Old life blown away
in     the wink of an eye, indeterminate nightmare stretching out ahead, a long
season in hell.

So what did he do, I ask you? He searched almost desperately for something to
divert his restless mind. Oh, there are all sorts of ways to divert yourself,

even in prison; it seems like the human mind is full of an infinite number of
possibilities when it comes to diversion. I told you about the sculptor and his
Three Ages of Jesus. There were coin collectors who were always losing their
collections to thieves, stamp collectors, one fellow who had postcards from
thirty-five different countries-and let me tell you, he would have turned out
your lights if he'd caught you diddling with his postcards.

Andy got interested in rocks. And the walls of his cell.

I think that his initial intention might have been to do no more than to carve
his initials into the wall where the poster of Rita Hayworth would soon be
hanging. His initials, or maybe a few lines from some poem. Instead, what he
found was that interestingly weak concrete. Maybe he started to carve his
initials and a big chunk of the wall just fell out. I can see him, lying there

on his bunk, looking at that broken chunk of concrete, turning it over in his
hands. Never mind the wreck of your whole life, never mind that you got
railroaded into this place by a whole trainload of bad luck. Let's forget all
that and look at this piece of concrete.

Some months further along he might have decided it would be fun to see how much
of that wall he could take out. But you can't just start digging into your wall

and then, when the weekly inspection (or one of the surprise inspections that
are always turning up interesting caches of booze, drugs, dirty pictures, and
weapons) comes around, say to the guard: "This? Just excavating a little hole in
my   cell wall. Not to worry, my good man."

No, he couldn't have that. So he came to me and asked if I could get him a Rita
Hayworth poster. Not a little one but a big one.

And, of course, he had the rock-hammer. I remember thinking when I got him that
gadget back in '48 that it would take a man six hundred years to burrow through
the wall with it. True enough. But Andy only had to go through half the wall-and
even with the soft concrete, it took him two rock-hammers and twenty-seven years
to do it.

Of course he lost most of one of those years to Normaden, and he could only work
at night, preferably late at night, when almost everybody is asleep-including

the guards who work the night shift. But I suspect the thing which slowed him


down the most was getting rid of the wall as he took it out. He could muffle the
sound of his work by wrapping the head of his hammer in rock-polishing cloths,
but what to do with the pulverized concrete and the occasional chunks that came
out whole?

I think he must have broken up the chunks into pebbles and . . .

I remembered the Sunday after I had gotten him the rockhammer. I remember
watching him walk across the exercise yard, his face puffy from his latest

go-round with the sisters. I saw him stoop, pick up a pebble . . . and it
disappeared up his sleeve. That inside sleeve-pocket is an old prison trick. Up
your sleeve or just inside the cuff of your pants. And I have another memory,

very strong but unfocused, maybe something I saw more than once. This memory is
of Andy Dufresne walking across the exercise yard on a hot summer day when the
air was utterly still. Still, yeah . . . except for the little breeze that

seemed to be blowing sand around Andy Dufresne's feet. So maybe he had a couple
of cheaters in his pants below the knees. You loaded the cheaters up with fill

and then just strolled around, your hands in your pockets, and when you felt
safe and unobserved, you gave the pockets a little twitch. The pockets, of
course, are attached by string or strong thread to the cheaters. The fill goes

cascading out of your pants legs as you walk. The World war II POWs who were
trying to tunnel out used the dodge.

The years went past and Andy brought his wall out to the exercise yard cupful by
cupful. He played the game with administrator after administrator, and they
thought it was because he wanted to keep the library growing. I have no doubt
that was part of it, but the main thing Andy wanted was to keep Cell 14 in
Cellblock 5 a single occupancy.

I doubt if he had any real plans or hopes of breaking out, at least not at

first. He probably assumed the wall was ten feet of solid concrete, and that if
he succeeded in boring all the way through it, he'd come out thirty feet over
the exercise yard. But like I say, I don't think he was worried overmuch about

breaking through. His assumption could have run this way: I m only making a foot
of progress every seven years or so; therefore, it would take me seventy years

to break through; that would make me one hundred and one years old.

Here's a second assumption I would have made, had I been Andy: that eventually I
would be caught and get a lot of solitary time, not to mention a very large

black mark on my record. After all, there was the regular weekly inspection and
a surprise toss-which usually came at night-every second week or so. He must
have decided that things couldn't go on for long. sooner or later, some screw
was going to peek behind Rita Hayworth just to make sure Andy didn't have a
sharpened spoon-handle or some marijuana reefers Scotch-taped to the wall.


And his response to that second assumption must have been To hell with it. Maybe
he even made a game out of it. How far in can I get before they find out? 
Prison

is a goddam boring place, and the chance of being surprised by an unscheduled
inspection in the middle of the night while he had his poster unstuck probably
added some spice to his life during the early years.

And I do believe it would have been impossible for him to get away with it just
on dumb luck. Not for twenty-seven years. Nevertheless, I have to believe that
for the first two years- until mid-May of 1950, when he helped Byron Hadley get
around the tax on his windfall inheritance-that's exactly what he did get by 
on.

Or maybe he had something more than dumb luck going for him even back then. He
had money, and he might have been slipping someone a little squeeze every week

to take it easy on him. Most guards will go along with that if the price is
right; it's money in their pockets and the prisoner gets to keep his whack off
pictures or his tailor made cigarettes. Also, Andy was a model prisoner- quiet,
well-spoken, respectful, non-violent. It's the crazies and the stampeders that
get         their cells turned upside-down at least once every six months, their
mattresses unzipped, their pillows taken away and cut open, the outflow pipe
from their toilets carefully probed.

Then, in 1950, Andy became something more than a model prisoner. In 1950, he
became a valuable commodity, a murderer who did tax-returns better than H&R
Block. He gave gratis estate-planning advice, set up tax-shelters, filled out

loan applications (sometimes creatively). I can remember him sitting behind his
desk in the library, patiently going over a car-loan agreement paragraph by

paragraph with a screwhead who wanted to buy a used DeSoto, telling the guy what
was good about the agreement and what was bad about it, explaining to him that

it was possible to shop for a loan and not get hit quite so bad, steering him
away from the finance companies, which in those days were sometimes little it
better than legal loan sharks. When he d finished, the screwhead started to put
out his hand . . . and then drew it back to himself quickly. He d forgotten for
a moment, you see, that he was dealing with a mascot, not a man.

Andy kept up on the tax laws and the changes in the stock markets and so his
usefulness didn't end after he d been in cold storage for awhile, as it might
have done. He began to get his library money, his running war with the sisters
had ended, and nobody tossed his cell very hard. He was a good nigger.

Then one day, very late in the going-perhaps around October of 1967-the

long-time hobby suddenly turned into something else. One night while was in the
hole up to his waist with Raquel Welch hanging down over his ass, the pick end 
of
his rock-hammer must have suddenly sunk into concrete past the hilt.

He would have dragged some chunks of concrete back, but maybe he heard other
falling down into that shaft, bouncing back and forth, clinking of that


standpipe. Did he know by then that he was going to come upon that shaft, or was
he totally surprised? I don't know. He might have seen the prison blueprints by
then or he might not have. If not, you can be damned sure he found a way to look
at them not long after.

All at once he must have realized that, instead of just playing a game, he was
playing for high stakes . . . in terms of his own life and his own future, tie
highest. Even then he couldn't have known for sure, but he muss have had a
pretty good idea because it was right around then that he talked to me about
Zihuatanejo for the first time. All of a sudden, instead of just being a toy,

that stupid hole in the wall became his master-if he knew about the sewer-pipe
at the bottom and that it led under the outer wall, it did, anyway.

He'd had the key under the rock in Buxton to worry about for years. Now he had D
worry that some eager-beaver new guard would look behind his poster and expose
the whole thing, or that he would get another cellmate, or that he would, after

all those years, suddenly be transferred He had all those things on his mind for
the next eight years. All Scan say is that he must have been one of the coolest
men who ever lived. I would have gone completely nuts after awhile, living with
al that uncertainty. But Andy just went on playing the game.

He had to carry tie possibility of discovery for another eight years-the
probability )f it, you might say, because no matter how carefully he stacked tie
cards    in his favor, as an inmate of a state prison, he just didn't have that

many to stack . . . and the gods had been kind to him for a very long time; some
nineteen years.

The most ghastly irony I can think of would have been if he had been offered a
parole. Can you imagine it? Three days before the parolee is actually released,
he is transferred into the light security wing to undergo a complete physical
and a battery of vocational tests. While he's there, his old cell is completely
cleaned out. Instead of getting his parole, Andy would have gotten a long turn
downstairs in solitary, followed by some more time upstairs . . . but in a
different cell.

If he broke into the shaft in 1967, how come he didn't escape until 1975 ? I
don't know for sure-but I can advance some pretty good guesses.

First, he would have become more careful than ever. He was too smart to just
push ahead at flank speed and try to get out in eight months, or even in
eighteen. He must have gone on widening the opening on the crawlspace a little
at       a time. A hole as big as a teacup by the time he took his New Year's 
Eve
drink that year. A hole as big as a dinner-plate by the time he took his

birthday drink in 1968. As big as a serving-tray by the time the 1969 baseball
season opened.


For a time I thought it should have gone much faster than it apparently

did-after he broke through, I mean. It seemed to me that, instead of hating to
pulverize the crap and take it out of his cell in the cheater gadgets I have
described, he could simply let it drop down the shaft. The length of time he
took makes me believe that he didn't dare do that. He might have decided that
the noise would arouse someone's suspicions. Or, if he knew about the

sewer-pipe, as I believe he must have, he would have been afraid that a falling
chunk of concrete would break it before he was ready, screwing up the cellblock
sewage system and leading to an investigation. And an investigation, needless to
say, would lead to ruin.

Still and all, I'd guess that, by the time Nixon was sworn in for his second

term, the hole would have been wide enough for him to wriggle through . . . and
probably sooner than that. Andy was a small guy.

Why didn't he go then?

That's where my educated guesses run out, folks; from this point they become
progressively wilder. One possibility is that the crawlspace itself was clogged
with crap and he had to clear it out. But that wouldn't account for all the
time. So what was it?

I think that maybe Andy got scared.

I've told you as well as I can how it is to be an institutional man. At first

you can't stand those four walls, then you get so you can abide them, then you
get so you accept them . . . and then, as your body and your mind and your
spirit adjust to life on an HO scale, you get to love them. You are told when to
eat, when you can write letters, when you can smoke. If you're at work in the
laundry or the plate-shop, you're assigned five minutes of each hour when you
can  go to the bathroom. For thirty-five years, my time was twenty-five minutes
after the hour, and after thirty-five years, that's the only time I ever felt

the need to take a piss or have a crap: twenty-five minutes past the hour. And
if for some reason I couldn't go, the need would pass at thirty after, and come
back at twenty-five past the next hour.

I think Andy may have been wrestling with that tiger-that institutional
syndrome-and also with the bulking fears that all of it might have been for
nothing.

How many nights must he have lain awake under his poster, thinking about that
sewer line, knowing that the one chance was all he'd ever get? The blueprints
might have told him how big the pipe's bore was, but a blueprint couldn't tell
him what it would be like inside that pipe-if he would be able to breathe

without choking, if the rats were big enough and mean enough to fight instead 
of


retreating . . . and a blueprint couldn't've told him what he'd find at the end
of the pipe, when and if he got there. Here's a joke even funnier than the

parole would have been: Andy breaks into the sewer line, crawls through five
hundred yards of choking, shit-smelling darkness, and comes up against a
heavy-gauge mesh screen at the end of it all. Ha, ha, very funny.

That would have been on his mind. And if the long shot actually came in and he
was able to get out, would he be able to get some civilian clothes and get away
from the vicinity of the prison undetected? Last of all, suppose he got out of
the pipe, got away from Shawshank before the alarm was raised, got to Buxton,
overturned the right rock. . . and found nothing beneath? Not necessarily
something      so dramatic as arriving at the right field and discovering that a
highrise apartment building had been erected on the spot, or that it had been
turned into a supermarket parking lot.

It could have been that some little kid who liked rocks noticed that piece of
volcanic glass, turned it over, saw the deposit-box key, and took both it and

the rock back to his room as souvenirs. Maybe a November hunter kicked the rock,
left the key exposed, and a squirrel or a crow with a liking for bright shiny

things had taken it away. Maybe there had been spring floods one year, breaching
the wall, washing the key away. Maybe anything.

So I think-wild guess or not-that Andy just froze in place for awhile. After
all, you can't lose if you don't bet. What did he have to lose, you ask? His
library, for one thing. The poison peace of institutional life, for another. Any
future chance to grab his safe identity.

But he finally did it, just as I have told you. He tried . . . and, my! Didn't
he succeed in spectacular fashion? You tell me!

But did he get away, you ask? What happened after? What happened when he got to
that meadow and turned over that rock . . . always assuming the rock was still
there? I can't describe that scene for you, because this institutional man is

still in this institution, and expects to be for years to come. But I'll tell

you this. Very late in the summer of 1975, on September 15th, to be exact, I 
got

a postcard which had been mailed from the tiny town of McNary, Texas. That town
is on the American side of the border, directly across from El Porvenir. The
message side of the card was totally blank. But I know. I know it in my heart as
surely     as I know that we're all going to die someday.

McNary was where he crossed. McNary, Texas.

So that's my story, Jack. I never believed how long it would take to write it
all down, or how many pages it would take. I started writing just after I got

that postcard, and here I am finishing up on January 14th, 1976. I've used three
pencils right down to knuckle-stubs, and a whole tablet of paper. I've kept the


pages carefully hidden. . . not that many could read my hen-tracks, anyway.
It stirred up more memories than I ever would have believed. Writing about
yourself seems to be a lot like sticking a branch into clear river-water and
roiling up the muddy bottom.

Well, you weren't writing about yourself I hear someone in the peanut-gallery
saying. You were writing about Andy Dufresne. You're nothing but a minor
character in your own story. But you know, that's just not so. It's all about

me, every damned word of it. Andy was the part of me they could never lock up,
the part of me that will rejoice when the gates finally open for me and I walk

out in my cheap suit with my twenty dollars of mad-money in my pocket. That part
of me will rejoice no matter how old and broken and scared the rest of me is. I
guess it's just that Andy had more of that part than me, and used it better.

There are others here like me, others who remember Andy. We're glad he's gone,
but a little sad, too. Some birds are not meant to be caged, that's all. Their
feathers are too bright, their songs too sweet and wild. So you let them go, or

when you open the cage to feed them they somehow fly out past you. And the part
of you that knows it was wrong to imprison them in the first place rejoices, but
still, the place where you live is that much more drab and empty for their
departure.

That's the story and I'm glad I told it, even if it is a bit inconclusive and

even though some of the memories the pencil prodded up (like that branch poking
up the river-mud) made me feel a little sad and even older than I am. Thank you
for listening. And Andy, if you're really down there, as I believe you are, 
look

at the stars for me just after sunset, and touch the sand, and wade in the
water, and feel free.
