When Andy came to Shawshank in 1948, he was thirty years old.  He was a short,
neat little man with sandy hair and small, clever hands.  He wore gold-rimmed
spectacles.  His fingernails were always clipped, and they were always clean.

That's a funny thing to remember about a man, I suppose, but it seems to sum
Andy up for me.  He always looked as if he should have been wearing a tie.  On 
the
outside he had been a vice-president in the trust department of a large Portland
bank.  Good work for a man as young as he was, especially when you consider how
conservative most banks are . . . and you have to multiply that conservatism by

ten when you get up into New England, where folks don't like to trust a man with
their money unless he's bald, limping, and constantly plucking at his pants to

get his truss around straight.  Andy was in for murdering his wife and her 
lover.

As I believe I have said, everyone in prison is an innocent man.  Oh, they read
that scripture the way those holy rollers on TV read the Book of Revelation.
They were the victims of judges with hearts of stone and balls to match, or
incompetent lawyers, or police frame-ups, or bad luck.  They read the scripture,
but      you can see a different scripture in their faces.  Most cons are a low 
sort,

no good to themselves or anyone else, and their worst luck was that their
mothers carried them to term.

In all my years at Shawshank, there have been less than ten men whom I believed
when they told me they were innocent.  Andy Dufresne was one of them, although I
only became convinced of his innocence over a period of years.  If I had been on
the jury that heard his case in Portland Superior Court over six stormy weeks in
1947-48, I would have voted to convict, too.

It was one hell of a case, all right; one of those juicy ones with all the right
elements.  There was a beautiful girl with society connections (dead), a local
sports   figure (also dead), and a prominent young businessman in the dock.  
There
was this, plus all the scandal the newspapers could hint at.  The prosecution 
had
an open-and-shut case.  The trial only lasted as long as it did because the DA

was planning to run for the U.S. House of Representatives and he wanted John Q.
Public to get a good long look at his resume.  It was a crackerjack legal 
circus,
with spectators getting in line at four in the morning, despite the subzero
temperatures, to assure themselves of a seat.

The facts of the prosecution's case that Andy never contested were these: that
he had a wife, Linda Collins Dufresne; that in June of 1947 she had expressed an
interest in learning the game of golf at the Falmouth Hills Country Club; that

she did indeed take lessons for four months; that her instructor was the

Falmouth Hills golf pro, Glenn Quentin; that in late August of 1947 Andy learned
that Quentin and his wife had become lovers; that Andy and Linda Dufresne argued
bitterly on the afternoon of September 10th, 1947. that the subject of their


argument was her infidelity.

He testified that Linda professed to be glad he knew; the sneaking around, she
said, was distressing. She told Andy that she planned to obtain a Reno divorce.
Andy told her he would see her in hell before he would see her in Reno. She went
off to spend the night with Quentin in Quentin's rented bungalow not far from

the golf course. The next morning his cleaning woman found both of them dead in
bed. Each had been shot four times.

It was that last fact that militated more against Andy than any of the others.

The DA with the political aspirations made a great deal of it in his opening
statement and his closing summation. Andrew Dufresne, he said, was not a wronged
husband seeking a hot-blooded revenge against his cheating wife; that, the DA

said, could be understood, if not condoned. But this revenge had been of a much
colder type. Consider! the DA thundered at the jury. Four and four! Not six
shots, but eight! He had fired the gun empty . . . and then stopped to reload 
so

he could shoot each of them again! FOUR FOR HIM AND FOUR FOR HER, the
Portland Sun blared. The Boston Register dubbed him the “Even-Steven Killer.”

A clerk from the Wise Pawnshop in Lewiston testified that he had sold a 
six-shot

.38 Police Special to Andrew Dufresne just two days before the double murder. A
bartender from the country club bar testified that Andy had come in around seven
o'clock on the evening of September 10th, had tossed off three straight whiskeys
in a twenty-minute period-when he got up from the bar-stool he told the
bartender that he was going up to Glenn Quentin's house and he, the bartender,
could "read about the rest of it in the papers." Another clerk, this one from

the Handy-Pik store a mile or so from Quentin's house, told the court that
Dufresne had come in around quarter to nine on that same night. He purchased
cigarettes, three quarts of beer, and some dishtowels. The county medical
examiner testified that Quentin and the Dufresne woman had been killed between
11:00 P.M. and 2:00 A.M. on the night of September 10th- 11th. The detective
from the Attorney General's office who had been in charge of the case testified
that there was a turnout less than seventy yards from the bungalow, and that on
the afternoon of September 11th, three pieces of evidence had been removed from
that turnout: first item, two empty quart bottles of Narragansett Beer (with the
defendant's fingerprints on them); second item, twelve cigarette ends (all

Kools, the defendant's brand); third item, a plaster cast of a set of tire
tracks (exactly matching the tread-and-wear pattern of the tires on the
defendant's 1947 Plymouth).

In the living room of Quentin's bungalow, four dishtowels had been found lying

on the sofa. There were bullet-holes through them and powder-burns on them. The
detective theorized (over the agonized objections of Andy's lawyer) that the
murderer       had wrapped the towels around the muzzle of the murder-weapon to 
muffle
the sound of the gunshots.


Andy Dufresne took the stand in his own defense and told his story calmly,
coolly, and dispassionately. He said he had begun to hear distressing rumors
about his wife and Glenn Quentin as early as the last week in July. In late

August he had become distressed enough to investigate a bit. On an evening when
Linda was supposed to have gone shopping in Portland after her golf lesson, Andy
had followed her and Quentin to Quentin's two-story rented house (inevitably
dubbed "the love-nest" by the papers). He had parked in the turnout until

Quentin drove her back to the country club where her car was parked, about three
hours later.

"Do you mean to tell this court that you followed your wife in your brand-new
Plymouth sedan?" the DA asked him on cross examination.

"I swapped cars for the evening with a friend," Andy said, and this cool
admission of how well-planned his investigation had been did him no good at all
in      the eyes of the jury.

After returning the friend's car and picking up his own, he had gone home. Linda
had been in bed, reading a book. He asked her how her trip to Portland had been.
She replied that it had been fun, but she hadn't seen anything she liked well
enough to buy. "That's when I knew for sure," Andy told the breathless
spectators.    He spoke in the same calm, remote voice in which he delivered 
almost
all         of his testimony.

"What was your frame of mind in the seventeen days between then and the night
your wife was murdered?" Andy's lawyer asked him.

"I was in great distress," Andy said calmly, coldly. Like a man reciting a
shopping list he said that he had considered suicide, and had even gone so far
as      to purchase a gun in Lewiston on September 8th.

His lawyer then invited him to tell the jury what had happened after his wife

left to meet Glenn Quentin on the night of the murders. Andy told them . . . and
the impression he made was the worst possible.

I knew him for close to thirty years, and I can tell you he was the most

self-possessed man I've ever known. What was right with him he'd only give you a
little at a time. What was wrong with him he kept bottled up inside. If he ever

had a dark night of the soul, as some writer or other has called it, you would
never know. He was the type of man who, if he had decided to commit suicide,
would do it without leaving a note but not until his affairs had been put neatly
in order. If he had cried on the witness stand, or if his voice had thickened

and grown hesitant, even if he had started yelling at that Washington-bound
District Attorney, I don't believe he would have gotten the life sentence he


wound up with. Even if he had've, he would have been out on parole by 1954. But
he told his story like a recording machine, seeming to say to the jury: This is

it. Take it or leave it. They left it.

He said he was drunk that night, that he'd been more or less drunk since August
24th, and that he was a man who didn't handle his liquor very well. Of course
that by itself would have been hard for any jury to swallow. They just couldn't
see this coldly self-possessed young man in the neat double-breasted three-piece
woolen suit ever getting falling-down drunk over his wife's sleazy little affair
with some small-town golf pro. I believed it because I had a chance to watch
Andy that those six men and six women didn't have.

Andy Dufresne took just four drinks a year all the time I knew him. He would
meet me in the exercise yard every year about a week before his birthday and

then again about two weeks before Christmas. On each occasion he would arrange
for a bottle of Jack Daniel's. He bought it the way most cons arrange to buy

their stuff-the slave's wages they pay in here, plus a little of his own. Up

until 1965 what you got for your time was a dime an hour. In '65 they raised it
all the way up to a quarter. My commission on liquor was and is ten per cent,
and when you add on that surcharge to the price of a fine sippin' whiskey like
the Black Jack, you get an idea of how many hours of Andy Dufresne's sweat in
the prison laundry was going to buy his four drinks a year.

On the morning of his birthday, September 20th, he would have himself a big
knock, and then he'd have another that night after lights-out. The following day
he'd give the rest of the bottle back to me, and I would share it around. As for
the other bottle, he dealt himself one drink Christmas night and another on New
Year's Eve. Then that bottle would also come to me with instructions to pass it
on. Four drinks a year-and that is the behavior of a man who has been bitten
hard by the bottle. Hard enough to draw blood.

He told the jury that on the night of the tenth he had been so drunk he could

only remember what had happened in little isolated snatches. He had gotten drunk
that afternoon-"I took on a double helping of Dutch courage" is how he put

it-before taking on Linda.

After she left to meet Quentin, he remembered deciding to confront them. On the
way to Quentin's bungalow, he swung into the country club for a couple of quick
ones. He could not, he said, remember telling the bartender he could "read about
the rest of it in the papers," or saying anything to him at all. He remembered
buying beer in the Handy-Pik, but not the dishtowels. "Why would I want
dishtowels?" he asked, and one of the papers reported that three of the lady
jurors shuddered.

Later, much later, he speculated to me about the clerk who had testified on the


subject of those dishtowels, and I think it's worth jotting down what he said.
"Suppose that, during their canvass for witnesses," Andy said one day in the
exercise yard, "they stumble on this fellow who sold me the beer that night. By
then three days have gone by. The facts of the case have been broadsided in all
the papers. Maybe they ganged up on the guy, five or six cops, plus the dick
from the Attorney General's office, plus the DA's assistant. Memory is a pretty
subjective thing, Red. They could have started out with 'Isn't it possible that

he purchased four or five dishtowels?' and worked their way up from there. If
enough people want you to remember something, that can be a pretty powerful
persuader."

I agreed that it could.

"But there's one even more powerful," Andy went on in that musing way of his. "I
think it's at least possible that he convinced himself. It was the limelight.

Reporters asking him questions, his picture in the papers . . . all topped, of
course, by his star turn in court. I'm not saying that he deliberately falsified
his story, or perjured himself. I think it's possible that he could have passed
a lie detector test with flying colors, or sworn on his mother's sacred name
that I bought those dishtowels. But still . . . memory is such a goddam
subjective thing.

"I know this much: even though my own lawyer thought I had to be lying about
half my story, he never bought that business about the dishtowels. It's crazy on
the face of it. I was pig-drunk, too drunk to have been thinking about muffling
the gunshots. If I'd done it, I just would have let them rip."

He went up to the turnout and parked there. He drank beer and smoked cigarettes.
He watched the lights downstairs in Quentin's place go out. He watched a single
light go on upstairs . . . and fifteen minutes later he watched that one go 
out.

He said he could guess the rest.

"Mr. Dufresne, did you then go up to Glenn Quentin's house and kill the two of
them?" his lawyer thundered.

"No, I did not," Andy answered. By midnight, he said, he was sobering up. He was
also feeling the first signs of a bad hangover. He decided to go home and sleep

it off and think about the whole thing in a more adult fashion the next day. "At
that time, as I drove home, I was beginning to think that the wisest course
would be to simply let her go to Reno and get her divorce."

"Thank you, Mr. Dufresne."
The DA popped up.


"You divorced her in the quickest way you could think of, didn't you? You
divorced her with a .38 revolver wrapped in dishtowels, didn't you?"

"No sir, I did not," Andy said calmly.
"And then you shot her lover."

"No, sir."

"You mean you shot Quentin first?"

"I mean I didn't shoot either one of them. I drank two quarts of beer and smoked
however many cigarettes the police found at the turnout. Then I drove home and
went to bed."

"You told the jury that between August twenty-fourth and September tenth you
were feeling suicidal."

"Yes, sir."

"Suicidal enough to buy a revolver."
"Yes."

"Would it bother you overmuch, Mr. Dufresne, if I told you that you do not seem
to me to be the suicidal type?"

"No," Andy said, "but you don't impress me as being terribly sensitive, and I
doubt very much that, if I were feeling suicidal, I would take my problem to
you."

There was a slight tense titter in the courtroom at this, but it won him no
points with the jury.

"Did you take your thirty-eight with you on the night of September tenth?"
"No; as I've already testified-"

"Oh, yes!" The DA smiled sarcastically. "You threw it into the river, didn't
you? The Royal River. On the afternoon of September ninth . "

"Yes, sir."

"One day before the murders."


"Yes, sir."

"That's convenient, isn't it?"

"It's neither convenient nor inconvenient. Only the truth."

"I believe you heard Lieutenant Mincher's testimony?" Mincher had been in charge
of the party which had dragged the stretch of the Royal near Pond Road Bridge,
from which Andy had testified he had thrown the gun. The police had not found
it.

"Yes, sir. You know I heard it."

"Then you heard him tell the court that they found no gun, although they dragged
for three days. That was rather convenient, too, wasn't it?"

"Convenience aside, it's a fact that they didn't find the gun," Andy responded
calmly. "But I should like to point out to both you and the jury that the Pond
Road Bridge is very close to where the Royal River empties into the Bay of
Yarmouth. The current is strong. The gun may have been carried out into the bay
itself."

"And so no comparison can be made between the riflings on the bullets taken from
the bloodstained corpses of your wife and Mr. Glenn Quentin and the riflings on
the barrel of your gun. That's correct, isn't it, Mr. Dufresne?"

"Yes. "

"That's also rather convenient, isn't it?"

At that, according to the papers, Andy displayed one of the few slight emotional
reactions he allowed himself during the entire six-week period of the trial. A
slight, bitter smile crossed his face.

"Since I am innocent of this crime, sir, and since I am telling the truth about
throwing my gun into the river the day before the crime took place, then it
seems to me decidedly inconvenient that the gun was never found."

The DA hammered at him for two days. He re-read the Handy-Pik clerk's testimony
about the dishtowels to Andy. Andy repeated that he could not recall buying

them, but admitted that he also couldn't remember not buying them.

Was it true that Andy and Linda Dufresne had taken out a joint insurance policy
in early 1947 ? Yes, that was true. And if acquitted, wasn't it true that Andy
stood to gain fifty thousand dollars in benefits? True. And wasn't it true that


he had gone up to Glenn Quentin's house with murder in his heart, and wasn't it
also true that he had indeed committed murder twice over? No, it was not true.
Then what did he think had happened, since there had been no signs of robbery?

"I have no way of knowing that, sir," Andy said quietly.

The case went to the jury at 1:00 P.M. on a snowy Wednesday afternoon. The
twelve jurymen and -women came back in at 3:30. The bailiff said they would have
been back earlier, but they had held off in order to enjoy a nice chicken dinner
from Bentley's Restaurant at the county's expense. They found him guilty, and
brother, if Maine had the death-penalty, he would have done the air dance before
that spring's crocuses poked their heads out of the snow.

The DA had asked him what he thought had happened, and Andy slipped the
question-but he did have an idea, and I got it out of him late one evening in
1955. It had taken those seven years for us to progress from nodding
acquaintances to fairly close friends- but I never felt really close to Andy until 1960 or so, and I believe I was the only one who ever did get really close
to him. Both being long-timers, we were in the same cellblock from beginning to
end, although I was halfway down the corridor from him.

"What do I think?" He laughed-but there was no humor in the sound. "I think
there was a lot of bad luck floating around that night. More than could ever get
together in the same short span of time again. I think it must have been some
stranger, just passing through. Maybe someone who had a flat tire on that road
after     I went home. Maybe a burglar. Maybe a psychopath. He killed them, 
that's
all. And I'm here."
