Time continued to pass-the oldest trick in the world, an maybe the only one that
really is magic. But Andy Dufresne ha changed. He had grown harder. That's the
only way I can think ( to put it. He went on doing Warden Norton's dirty work
and F held onto the library, so outwardly things were about the same. H
continued to have his birthday drinks and his year-end holiday drinks; he
continued        to share out the rest of each bottle. I got his fresh rock 
polishing
cloths      from time to time, and in 1967 I g him a new rock-hammer-the one I'd
gotten him nineteen yea ago had, as I told you, plumb worn out. Nineteen 
years.'

When you say it sudden like that, those three syllables sound like the thud and
double locking of a tomb door. The rock-hammer, which had bee a ten dollar item
back then, went for twenty-two by '67. He and had a sad little grin over that.

Andy continued to shape and polish the rocks he found in the exercise yard, but
the yard was smaller by then; half of what he been there in 1950 had been
asphalted over in 1962. Nonetheless he found enough to keep him occupied, I
guess. When he hi finished with each rock he would put it carefully on his winds
ledge, which faced east. He told me he liked to look at them in the sun, the
pieces   of the planet he had taken up from the dirt and shaped. Schists,

quartzes, granites. Funny little mica-sculptures that were held together with
airplane glue. Various sedimentary conglomerates that were polished and cut in
such       a way that you could see why Andy called them "millennium 
sandwiches"-the
layers of different material that had built up over a period of decades and
centuries.

Andy would give his stones and his rock-sculptures away from time to time in
order to make room for new ones. He gave me the greatest number, I

think-counting the stones that looked like matched cufflinks, I had five. There
was one of the mica sculptures I told you about, carefully crafted to look like 
a
man throwing a javelin, and two of the sedimentary conglomerates, all the levels
showing in smoothly polished cross-section. I've still got them, and I take 
them

down every so often and think about what a man can do, if he has time enough and
the will to use it, a drop at a time.

So, on the outside, at least, things were about the same. If Norton had wanted
to break Andy as badly as he had said, he would have had to look below the
surface to see the change. But if he had seen how different Andy had become, I
think Norton would have been well-satisfied with the four years following his
clash with Andy.

He had told Andy that Andy walked around the exercise yard as if he were at a
cocktail party. That isn't the way I would have put it, but I know what he
meant. It goes back to what I said about Andy wearing his freedom like an
invisible coat, about how he never really developed a prison mentality. His 
eyes

never got that dull look. He never developed the walk that men get when the day
is over and they are going back to their cells for another endless night-that


flat-footed, hump-shouldered walk. Andy walked with his shoulders squared, and
his step was always light, as if he were heading home to a good home-cooked meal
and a good woman instead of to a tasteless mess of soggy vegetables, lumpy
mashed potato, and a slice or two of that fatty, gristly stuff most of the cons

called mystery meat . . . that, and a picture of Raquel Welch on the wall.

But for those four years, although he never became exactly like the Others he

did become silent, introspective, and brooding. Who could blame him? So maybe it
was Warden Norton who was pleased . . . at least, for awhile.

His dark mood broke around the time of the 1967 World Series. That was the dream
year, the year the Red Sox won the pennant instead of placing ninth, as the Las

Vegas bookies had predicted. When it happened-when they won the American League
pennant -a kind of ebullience engulfed the whole prison. There was a goofy sort

of feeling that if the Dead Sox could come to life, then maybe anybody could do
it. I can't explain that feeling now, any more than an ex-Beatlemaniac could
explain that madness, I suppose. But it was real. Every radio in the place was

tuned to the games as the Red Sox pounded down the stretch. There was gloom when
the Sox dropped a pair in Cleveland near the end, and a nearly riotous joy when

Rico Petrocelli put away the pop fly that clinched it. And then there was the

gloom that came when Lonborg was beaten in the seventh game of the Series to end
the dream just sort of complete fruition. It probably pleased Norton to no end,

the son of a bitch. He liked his prison wearing sackcloth and ashes.

But for Andy, there was no tumble back down into gloom. He wasn't much of a
baseball fan anyway, and maybe that was why. Nevertheless, he seemed to have
caught the current of good feeling, and for him it didn't peter out again after

the last game of the Series. He had taken that invisible coat out of the closet
and put it on again.

I remember one bright-gold fall day in very late October, a couple of weeks
after the World Series had ended. It must have been a Sunday, because the
exercise yard was full of men "walking off the week"-tossing a Frisbee or two,
passing around a football, bartering what they had to barter. Others would be at
the long table in the Visitors' Hall, under the watchful eyes of the screws,
talking with their relatives, smoking cigarettes, telling sincere lies,

receiving their picked-over care-packages.

Andy was squatting Indian fashion against the wall, chunking two small rocks
together in his hands, his face turned up into the sunlight. It was surprisingly
warm, that sun, for a day so late in the year.

"Hello, Red," he called. "Come on and sit a spell."
I did.


"You want this?" he asked, and handed me one of the two carefully polished
"millennium sandwiches" I just told you about

"I sure do," I said. "It's very pretty. Thank you."

He shrugged and changed the subject. "Big anniversary coming up for you next
year."

I nodded. Next year would make me a thirty-year man. Sixty per cent of my life
spent in Shawshank State Prison.

"Think you'll ever get out?"

"Sure. When I have a long white beard and just about three be marbles left
rolling around upstairs."

He smiled a little and then turned his face up into the sun again, his eyes
closed. "Feels good."

"I think it always does when you know the damn winter's almost right on top of
you."

He nodded, and we were silent for awhile.

"When I get out of here," Andy said finally, "I'm going where it's warm all the
time." He spoke with such calm assurance you would have thought he had only a
month or so left to serve. "You know where I'm goin, Red?"

"Nope. "

"Zihuatanejo," he said, rolling the word softly from his tongue like music.
"Down in Mexico. It's a little place maybe twenty miles from Playa Azul and

Mexico Highway Thirty-seven. It's a hundred miles northwest of Acapulco on the
Pacific Ocean. You know what the Mexicans say about the Pacific?"

I told him I didn't.

"They say it has no memory. And that's where I want to finish out my life, Red.
In a warm place that has no memory."

He had picked up a handful of pebbles as he spoke; now he tossed them, one by
one, and watched them bounce and roll across the baseball diamond's dirt
infield, which would be under a foot of snow before long.

"Zihuatanejo. I'm going to have a little hotel down there. Six cabanas along the
beach, and six more set further back, for the highway trade. 111 have a guy


who'll take my guests out charter fishing. There'll be a trophy for the guy who
catches the biggest marlin of the season, and I'll put his picture up in the
lobby. It won't be a family place. It'll be a place for people on their
honeymoons first or second varieties."

"And where are you going to get the money to buy this fabulous place?" I asked
"Your stock account?"

He looked at me and smiled. "That's not so far wrong," he said. "Sometimes you
startle me, Red."

"What are you talking about?"

"There are really only two types of men in the world when it comes to bad
trouble," Andy said, cupping a match between his hands and lighting a 
cigarette.

"Suppose there was a house full of rare paintings and sculptures and fine old
antiques, Red? And suppose the guy who owned the house heard that there was a
monster of a hurricane headed right at it? One of those two kinds of men just
hopes    for the best. The hurricane will change course, he says to himself. No

right-thinking hurricane would ever dare wipe out all these Rembrandts, my two
Degas horses, my Grant Woods, and my Bentons. Furthermore, God wouldn't allow
it. And if worse comes to worst, they're insured. That's one sort of man. The

other sort just assumes that hurricane is going to tear right through the middle
of his house. If the weather bureau says the hurricane just changed course, this
guy assumes it'll change back in order to put his house on ground-zero again.
This second type of guy knows there's no harm in hoping for the best as long as
you're prepared for the worst."

I lit a cigarette of my own. "Are you saying you prepared for the eventuality? 
"

"Yes. I prepared for the hurricane. I knew how bad it looked. I didn't have much
time, but in the time I had, I operated. I had a friend-just about the only

person who stood by me-who worked for an investment company in Portland. He died
about six years ago. "

"Sorry. "

“Yeah.” Andy tossed his butt away. "Linda and I had about fourteen thousand
dollars. Not a big bundle, but hell, we were young. We had our whole lives ahead
of us." He grimaced a little, then laughed. "When the shit hit the fan, I

started lugging my Rembrandts out of the path of the hurricane. I sold my stocks
and paid the capital gains tax just like a good little boy. Declared 
everything.

Didn't cut any corners."


"Didn't they freeze your estate?"

"I was charged with murder, Red, not dead! You can't freeze the assets of an
innocent man-thank God. And it was awhile before they even got brave enough to
charge me with the crime. Jim-my friend-and I, we had some time. I got hit

pretty good, just dumping everything like that. Got my nose skinned. But at the
time I had worse things to worry about than a small skinning on the stock
market."

"Yeah, I'd say you did."

"But when I came to Shawshank it was all safe. It's still safe. Outside these
walls, Red, there's a man that no living soul has ever seen face to face. He has
a Social Security card and a Maine driver's license. He's got a birth
certificate. Name of Peter Stevens. Nice, anonymous name, huh?"

"Who is he?" I asked. I thought I knew what he was going to say, but I couldn't
believe it.

"Me. "

"You're not going to tell me that you had time to set up a false identity while
the bulls were sweating you," I said, "or that you finished the job while you
were on trial for-"

"No, I'm not going to tell you that. My friend Jim was the one who set up the
false identity. He started after my appeal was turned down, and the major pieces
of identification were in his hands by the spring of 1950."

"He must have been a pretty close friend," I said. I was not sure how much of
this I believed a little, a lot, or none. But the day was warm and the sun was
out, and it was one hell of a good story. "All of that's one hundred per cent
illegal, setting up a false ID like that. "

"He was a close friend," Andy said. "We were in the war together. France,
Germany, the occupation. He was a good friend.

He knew it was illegal, but he also knew that setting up a false identity in

this country is very easy and very safe. He took my money my money with all the
taxes on it paid so the IRS wouldn't get too interested-and invested it for

Peter Stevens. He did that in 1950 and 1951. Today it amounts to three hundred
and seventy thousand dollars, plus change."

I guess my jaw made a thump when it dropped against my chest, because he 
smiled.


"Think of all the things people wish they'd invested in since 1950 or so, and
two or three of them will be things Peter Stevens was into. If I hadn't ended up
in here, I'd probably be worth seven or eight million bucks by now. I'd have a
Rolls . . . and probably an ulcer as big as a portable radio."

His hands went to the dirt and began sifting out more pebbles. They moved
gracefully, restlessly.

"It was hoping for the best and expecting the worst-nothing but that. The false
name was. just to keep what little capital I had untainted. It was lugging the
paintings out of the path of the hurricane. But I had no idea that the 
hurricane

. . . that it could go on as long as it has."

I didn't say anything for awhile. I guess I was trying to absorb the idea that

this small, spare man in prison gray next to me could be worth more money than
Warden Norton would make in the rest of his miserable life, even with the scams
thrown in.

"When you said you could get a lawyer, you sure weren't kidding," I said at

last. "For that kind of dough you could have hired Clarence Darrow, or whoever's
passing for him these days. Why didn't you, Andy? Christ! You could have been
out of here like a rocket."

He smiled. It was the same smile that had been on his face when he'd told me he
and his wife had had their whole lives ahead of them "No," he said.

"A good lawyer would have sprung the Williams kid from Cashman whether he wanted
to go or not," I said. I was getting carried away now. "You could have gotten

your new trial, hired private detectives to look for that guy Blatch, and blown
Norton out of the water to boot. Why not, Andy?"

"Because I outsmarted myself. If I ever try to put my hands on Peter Stevens's
money from inside here, I'll lose every cent of it. My friend Jim could have
arranged it, but Jim's dead. You see the problem? "

I saw it. For all the good that money could do Andy, it might as well have
really belonged to another person. In a way, it did. And if the stuff it was

invested in suddenly turned bad, all Andy could do would be to watch the plunge,
to trace it day after day on the stocks and-bonds page of the Press-Herald. 
It's

a tough life if you don't weaken, I guess.

"I'll tell you how it is, Red. There's a big hayfield in the town of Buxton. You
know where Buxton is at, don't you?"

I said I did. It lies right next door to Scarborough.


"That's right. And at the north end of this particular hayfield there's a rock
wall, right out of a Robert Frost poem. And somewhere along the base of that
wall is a rock that has no business in a Maine hayfield. It's a piece of

volcanic glass, and until 1947 it was a paperweight on my office desk. My friend
Jim put it in that wall. There's a key underneath it. The key opens a safe

deposit box in the Portland branch of the Casco Bank."

"I guess you're in a peck of trouble," I said. "When your friend Jim died, the
IRS must have opened all of his safe deposit boxes. Along with the executor of
his will, of course."

Andy smiled and tapped the side of my head. "Not bad. There's more up there than
marshmallows, I guess. But we took care of the possibility that Jim might die
while I was in the slam. The box is in the Peter Stevens name, and once a year

the firm of lawyers that served as Jim's executors sends a check to the Casco to
cover the rental of the Stevens box.

"Peter Stevens is inside that box, just waiting to get out. His birth
certificate, his Social Security card, and his driver's license. The license is
six      years out of date because Jim died six years ago, true, but it's still
perfectly renewable for a five-dollar fee. His stock certificates are there, the
tax-free municipals, and about eighteen bearer bonds in the amount of ten
thousand dollars each."

I whistled.

"Peter Stevens is locked in a safe deposit box at the Casco Bank in Portland and
Andy Dufresne is locked in a safe deposit box at Shawshank," he said. "Tit for
tat. And the key that unlocks the box and the money and the new life is under a
hunk of black glass in a Buxton hayfield. Told you this much, so I'll tell you
something else, Red-for the last twenty years, give or take, I have been

watching the papers with a more than usual interest for news of any construction
projects in Buxton. I keep thinking that someday soon I'm going to read that
they're putting a highway through there, or erecting a new community hospital,
or building a shopping center. Burying my new life under ten feet of concrete,

or spitting it into a swamp somewhere with a big load of fill."

I blurted, "Jesus Christ, Andy, if all of this is true, how do you keep from
going crazy?"

He smiled. "So far, all quiet on the Western front."
"But it could be years-"

"It will be. But maybe not as many as the State and Warden Norton think it's
going to be. I just can't afford to wait that long. I keep thinking about


Zihuatanejo and that small hotel. That's all I want from my life now, Red, and I
don't think that's too much to want. I didn't kill Glenn Quentin and I didn't

kill my wife, and that hotel . . . it's not too much to want. To swim and get a

tan and sleep in a room with open windows and space . . . that's not too much to
want."

He slung the stones away.

"You know, Red," he said in an offhand voice, " a place like that . . . I'd have
to have a man who knows how to get things."

I thought about it for a long time. And the biggest drawback in my mind wasn't
even that we were talking pipedreams in a shitty little prison exercise yard

with armed guards looking down at us from their sentry posts. "I couldn't do
it," I said. "I couldn't get along on the outside. I'm what they call an
institutional man now. In here I'm the man who can get it for you, yeah. But 
out

there, anyone can get it for you. Out there, if you want posters or rock hammers
or one particular record or a boat-in-a-bottle model kit, you can use the

fucking Yellow Pages. In here, I'm the fucking Yellow Pages. I wouldn't know how
to begin. Or where."

"You underestimate yourself," he said. "You're a self-educated man, a self-made
man. A rather remarkable man, I think."

"Hell, I don't even have a high school diploma."

"I know that," he said. "But it isn't just a piece of paper that makes a man.
And it isn't just prison that breaks one, either."

"I couldn't hack it outside, Andy. I know that."

He got up. "You think it over," he said casually, just as the inside whistle
blew. And he strolled off, as if he were a free man who had just made another

free man a proposition. And for awhile just that was enough to make melees free.
Andy could do that. He could make me forget for a time that we were both lifers,
at the mercy of a hard-ass parole board and a psalm-singing warden who liked
Andy Dufresne right where he was. After all, Andy was a lap-dog who could do
tax-returns. What a wonderful animal! But by that night in my cell I felt like a
prisoner again. The whole idea seemed absurd, and that mental image of blue
water and white beaches seemed more cruel than foolish-it dragged at my brain
like a fishhook. I just couldn't wear that invisible coat the way Andy did. I

fell asleep that night and dreamed of a great glassy black stone in the middle
of a hayfield; a stone shaped like a giant blacksmith's anvil. I was trying to

rock the stone up so I could get the key that was underneath. It wouldn't budge;
it was just too damned big. And in the background, but getting closer, I could


hear the baying of bloodhounds.
