By World Series time of 1950-this was the year the Philadelphia Whiz Kids
dropped four straight, you will remember-Andy was having no more trouble from
the sisters. Stammas and Hadley had passed the word. If Andy Dufresne came to
either of them, or any of the other screws that formed a part of their coterie,

and showed so much as a single drop of blood in his underpants, every sister in
Shawshank would go to bed that night with a headache. They didn't fight it. As I
have pointed out, there was always an eighteen-year old car thief or a firebug

or some guy who'd gotten his kicks handling little children. After the day on
the plate-shop roof, Andy went his way and the sisters went theirs.

He was working in the library then, under a tough old con named Brooks Hatlen.
Hatlen had gotten the job back in the late twenties because he had a college
education. Brooksie's degree was in animal husbandry, true enough, but college
educations in institutes of lower learning like The Shank are so rare that it's

a case of beggars not being able to be choosers.

In 1952 Brooksie, who had killed his wife and daughter after a losing streak at
poker back when Coolidge was President, was paroled. As usual, the State in all
its wisdom had let him go long after any chance he might have had to become a
useful part of society was gone. He was sixty-eight and arthritic when he
tottered  out of the main gate in his Polish suit and his French shoes, his

parole papers in one hand and a Greyhound bus ticket in the other. He was crying
when he left. Shawshank was his world. What lay beyond its walls was as terrible
to Brooks as the Western Seas had been to superstitious fifteenth-century

sailors. In prison, Brooksie had been a person of some importance. He was the
librarian, an educated man. If he went to the Kittery library and asked for a
job, they wouldn't even give him a library card. I heard he died in a home for
indigent old folks up Freeport way in 1953, and at that he lasted about six

months longer than I thought he would. Yeah, I guess the State got its own back
on Brooksie, all right. They trained him to like it inside the shithouse and

then they threw him out.

Andy succeeded to Brooksie's job, and he was librarian for twenty-three years.
He used the same force of will I'd seen him use on Byron Hadley to get what he
wanted for the library, and I saw him gradually turn one small room (which still
smelled of turpentine because it had been a paint closet until 1922 and had
never  been properly aired) lined with Reader's Digest Condensed Books and
National Geographies into the best prison library in New England.

He did it a step at a time. He put a suggestion box by the door and patiently

weeded out such attempts at humor as More Fuk-Boox Pleeze and Excape in 10 EZ
Lesions. He got hold of the things the prisoners seemed serious about. He wrote

to the major book clubs in New York and got two of them, The Literary Guild and
The Book-of-the-Month Club, to send editions of all their major selections to 
us


at a special cheap rate. He discovered a hunger for information on such small
hobbies as soap-carving, woodworking, sleight of hand, and card solitaire. He
got     all the books he could on such subjects. And those two jailhouse 
staples,
Erie Stanley Gardner and Louis L'Amour. Cons never seem to get enough of the
courtroom or the open range. And yes, he did keep a box of fairly spicy
paperbacks   under the checkout desk, loaning them out carefully and making sure
they always got back. Even so, each new acquisition of that type was quickly
read to tatters.

He began to write to the State Senate in Augusta in 1954. Stammas was warden by
then, and he used to pretend Andy was some sort of mascot. He was always in the
library, shooting the bull with Andy, and sometimes he'd even throw a paternal

arm around Andy's shoulders or give him a goose. He didn't fool anybody. Andy
Dufresne was no one's mascot.

He told Andy that maybe he'd been a banker on the outside, but that part of his
life was receding rapidly into his past and he had better get a hold on the

facts of prison life. As far as that bunch of jumped-up Republican Rotarians in
Augusta was concerned, there were only three viable expenditures of the
taxpayers' money in the field of prisons and corrections. Number one was more

walls, number two was more bars, and number three was more guards. As far as the
State Senate was concerned, Stammas explained, the folks in Thomastan and
Shawshank and Pittsfield and South Portland were the scum of the earth. They
were there to do hard time, and by God and Sonny Jesus, it was hard time they
were going to do. And if there were a few weevils in the bread, wasn't that 
just

too fucking bad?

Andy smiled his small, composed smile and asked Stammas what would happen to a
block of concrete if a drop of water fell on it once every year for a million

years. Stammas laughed and clapped Andy on the back. "You got no million years,
old horse, but if you did, I bleeve you'd do it with that same little grin on

your face. You go on and write your letters. I'll even mail them for you if you
pay for the stamps."

Which Andy did. And he had the last laugh, although Stammas and Hadley weren't
around to see it. Andy's requests for library funds were routinely turned down
until 1960, when he received a check for two hundred dollars-the Senate probably
appropriated it in hopes that he would shut up and go away. Vain hope. Andy felt
that he had finally gotten one foot in the door and he simply redoubled his

efforts; two letters a week instead of one. In 1962 he got four hundred dollars,
and for the rest of the decade the library received seven hundred dollars a year
like clockwork. By 1971 that had risen to an even thousand. Not much stacked up
against what your average small-town library receives, I guess, but a thousand
bucks can buy a lot of recycled Perry Mason stories and Jake Logan Westerns. By
the time Andy left, you could go into the library (expanded from its original


paint-locker to three rooms), and find just about anything you'd want. And if
you couldn't find it, chances were good that Andy could get it for you.

Now you're asking yourself if all this came about just because Andy told Byron
Hadley how to save the taxes on his windfall inheritance. The answer is yes.

And no. You can probably figure out what happened for yourself.

Word got around that Shawshank was housing its very own pet financial wizard. In
the late spring and the summer of 1950, Andy set up two trust funds for guards
who wanted to assure a college education for their kids, he advised a couple of
others who wanted to take small fliers in common stock (and they did pretty damn
well, as things turned out; one of them did so well he was able to take an early
retirement two years later), and I'll be damned if he didn't advise the warden
himself, old Lemon Lips George Dunahy, on how to go about setting up a

tax-shelter for himself. That was just before Dunahy got the bum's rush, and I
believe he must have been dreaming about all the millions his book was going to
make him. By April of 1951, Andy was doing the tax returns for half the screws
at Shawshank, and by 1952, he was doing almost all of them. He was paid in what
may be a prison's most valuable coin: simple good will.

Later on, after Greg Stammas took over the warden's office, Andy became even
more important-but if I tried to tell you the specifics of just how, I'd be
guessing. There are some things I know about and others I can only guess at. I
know that there were some prisoners who received all sorts of special
considerations-radios in their cells, extraordinary visiting privileges, things

like that-and there were people on the outside who were paying for them to have
those privileges. Such people are known as "angels" by the prisoners. All at

once some fellow would be excused from working in the plate-shop on Saturday
forenoons, and you'd know that fellow had an angel out there who'd coughed up a
chunk  of dough to make sure it happened. The way it usually works is that the
angel will pay the bribe to some middle-level screw, and the screw will spread

the grease both up and down the administrative ladder.

Then there was the discount auto-repair service that laid Warden Dunahy low. It
went underground for awhile and then emerged stronger than ever in the late
fifties. And some of the contractors that worked at the prison from time to time
were paying kickbacks to the top administration officials, I'm pretty sure, and

the same was almost certainly true of the companies whose equipment was bought
and installed in the laundry and the license-plate shop and the stamping-mill

that was built in 1963.

By the late sixties there was also a booming trade in pills, and the same
administrative crowd was involved in turning a buck on that. All of it added up
to              a pretty good-sized river of illicit income. Not like the pile 
of clandestine
bucks that must fly around a really big prison like Attica or San Quentin, but


not peanuts, either. And money itself becomes a problem after awhile. You can't
just stuff it into your wallet and then shell out a bunch of crumpled twenties

and dog-eared tens when you want a pool built in your back yard or an addition
put on your house. Once you get past a certain point, you have to explain where
that money came from . . . and if your explanations aren't convincing enough,
you're apt to wind up wearing a number yourself.

So there was a need for Andy's services. They took him out of the laundry and
installed him in the library, but if you wanted to look at it another way, they
never took him out of the laundry at all. They just set him to work washing
dirty money instead of dirty sheets He funneled it into stocks, bonds, tax-free
municipals, you name it.

He told me once about ten years after that day on the plate-shop roof that his
feelings about what he was doing were pretty clear, and that his conscience was
relatively untroubled. The rackets would have gone on with him or without him.

He had not asked to be sent to Shawshank, he went on; he was an innocent man who
had been victimized by colossal bad luck, not a missionary or a do-gooder.

"Besides, Red," he told me with that same half-grin, "what I'm doing in here
isn't all that different from what I was doing outside. I'll hand you a pretty
cynical axiom: the amount of expert financial help an individual or company
needs rises in direct proportion to how many people that person or business is
screwing.

"The people who run this place are stupid, brutal monsters for the most part.

The people who run the straight world are brutal and monstrous, but they happen
not to be quite as stupid, because the standard of competence out there is a

little higher. Not much, but a little. "

"But the pills," I said. "I don't want to tell you your business, but they make

me nervous. Reds, uppers, downers, Nembutals- now they've got these things they
call Phase Fours. I won't get anything like that. Never have."

"No," Andy said. "I don't like the pills, either. Never have. But I'm not much
of a one for cigarettes or booze, either. But I don't push the pills. I don't
bring them in, and I don't sell them once they are in. Mostly it's the screws
who do that."

"But-"

"Yeah, I know. There's a fine line there. What it comes down to, Red, is some
people refuse to get their hands dirty at all. That's called sainthood, and the
pigeons land on your shoulders and crap all over your shirt. The other extreme
is to take a bath in the dirt and deal any goddamned thing that will turn a


dollar-guns, switchblades big H. what the hell. You ever have a con come up to
you and offer you a contract?"

I nodded. It's happened a lot of times over the years. You are, after all, the
man who can get it. And they figure if you can get them batteries for their
transistor radios or cartons of Luckies or lids of reefer, you can put them in
touch with a guy who'll use a knife. "Sure you have," Andy agreed. "But you
don't do it. Because guys like us, Red, we know there's a third choice. An
alternative to staying simon-pure or bathing in the filth and the slime. It's

the alternative that grown-ups all over the world pick. You balance off your
walk through the hog-wallow against what it gains you. You choose the lesser of
two evils and try to keep your good intentions in front of you. And I guess you
judge how well you're doing by how well you sleep at night . . . and what your
dreams are like. "

"Good intentions," I said, and laughed. "I know all about that Andy. A fellow
can toddle right off to hell on that road."

"Don't you believe it," he said, growing somber. "This is hell right here. Right
here in The Shank. They sell pills and I tell them what to do with the money.
But I've also got the library, and I know of over two dozen guys who have used
the books in there to help them pass their high school equivalency tests. Maybe
when they get out of here they'll be able to crawl off the shit heap. When we
needed that second room back in 1957, I got it. Because they want to keep me
happy. I work cheap. That's the trade-off."

"And you've got your own private quarters."
"Sure. That's the way I like it."

The prison population had risen slowly all through the fifties, and it damn near
exploded in the sixties, what with every college-age kid in America wanting to
try dope and the perfectly ridiculous penalties for the use of a little reefer.

But in all that time Andy never had a cellmate, except for a big, silent Indian
named Normaden (like all Indians in The Shank, he was called Chief), and
Normaden didn't last long. A lot of the other long-timers thought Andy was
crazy, but Andy just smiled. He lived alone and he liked it that way . . . and
as he'd said, they liked to keep him happy. He worked cheap.

Prison time is slow time, sometimes you'd swear it's stop-time, but it passes. 
It passes.
George Dunahy departed the scene in a welter of newspaper headlines shouting
SCANDAL and NEST-FEATHERING.  Stammas succeeded him, and for the next six
years Shawshank was a kind of living hell. During the reign of Greg Stammas the 
beds in
the infirmary and the cells in the Solitary Wing were always full.


One day in 1958 I looked at myself in a small shaving mirror I kept in my cell

and saw a forty-year-old man looking back at me. A kid had come in back in 1938,
a kid with a big mop of carroty red hair, half-crazy with remorse, thinking

about suicide. That kid was gone. The red hair was going gray and starting to
recede. There were crow's tracks around the eyes. On that day I could see an old
man inside, waiting his time to come out. It scared me. Nobody wants to grow old
in stir.

Stammas went early in 1959. There had been several investigative reporters
sniffing around, and one of them even did four months under an assumed name, for
a crime made up out of whole cloth. They were getting ready to drag out

SCANDAL and NEST-FEATHERING again, but before they could bring the hammer
down on him, Stammas ran. I can understand that; boy, can I ever. If he had 
been tried
and convicted, he could have ended up right in here. If so, he might have 
lasted all

of five hours. Byron Hadley had gone two years earlier. The sucker had a heart
attack and took an early retirement.

Andy never got touched by the Stammas affair. In early 1959 a new warden was
appointed, and a new assistant warden, and a new chief of guards. For the next
eight months or so, Andy was just another con again. It was during that period
that Normaden, the big half-breed Passamaquoddy, shared Andy's cell with him.
Then everything just started up again. Normaden was moved out, and Andy was
living in solitary splendor again. The names at the top change, but the rackets
never do.

I talked to Normaden once about Andy. "Nice Della," Normaden said. It was hard
to make out anything he said because he had a harelip and a cleft palate; his
words all came out in a slush. "I liked it there. He never made fun. But he

didn't want me there. I could tell." Big shrug. "I was glad to go, me. Bad draft
in that cell. All the time cold. He don't let nobody touch his things. That's
okay. Nice man, never made fun. But big draft."