Rita Hayworth hung in Andy's cell until 1955, if I remember right. Then it was
Marilyn Monroe, that picture from The Seven-Year Itch where she's standing over
a subway grating and the warm air is flipping her skirt up. Marilyn lasted until
1960, and she was considerably tattered about the edges when Andy replaced her
with Jayne Mansfield. Jayne was, you should pardon the expression, a bust. After
only a year or so she was replaced with an English actress-might have been 
Hazel

Court, but I'm not sure. In 1966 that one came down and Raquel Welch went up for
a record breaking six-year engagement in Andy's cell. The last poster to hang

there was a pretty country-rock singer whose name was Linda Ronstadt.

I asked him once what the posters meant to him, and he gave me a peculiar,
surprised sort of look. "Why, they mean the same thing to me as they do to most
cons,   I guess," he said. "Freedom. You look at those pretty women and you feel
like you could almost . . . not quite but almost . . . step right through and be
beside them. Be free. I guess that's why I always liked Raquel Welch the best.

It wasn't just her; it was that beach she was standing on. Looked like she was
down in Mexico somewhere. Someplace quiet, where a man would be able to hear
himself think. Didn't you ever feel that way about a picture, Red? That you

could almost step right through it?"

I said I'd never really thought of it that way.

"Maybe someday you'll see what I mean," he said, and he was right. Years later I
saw exactly what he meant . . . and when I did, the first thing I thought of was
Normaden, and about how he'd said it was always cold in Andy's cell.

A terrible thing happened to Andy in late March or early April of 1963. I have
told you that he had something that most of the other prisoners, myself
included, seemed to lack. Call it a sense of equanimity, or a feeling of inner
peace, maybe even a constant and unwavering faith that someday the long
nightmare would end.

Whatever you want to call it, Andy Dufresne always seemed to have his act
together. There was none of that sullen desperation about him that seems to
afflict most lifers after awhile; you could never smell hopelessness on him.

Until that late winter of '63.

We had another warden by then, a man named Samuel Norton. The Mathers, Cotton
and Increase, would have felt right at home with Sam Norton. So far as I know,

no one had ever seen him so much as crack a smile. He had a thirty-year pin from
the Baptist Advent Church of Eliot. His major innovation as the head of our
happy family was to make sure that each incoming prisoner had a New Testament.
He had a small plaque on his desk, gold letters inlaid in teakwood, which said
CHRIST IS MY SAVIOR. A sampler on the wall, made by his wife, read:


HIS JUDGMENT COMETH AND THAT RIGHT EARLY.

This latter sentiment cut zero ice with most of us.

We felt that the judgment had already occurred, and we would be willing to
testify with the best of them that the rock would not hide us nor the dead tree
give us shelter. He had a Bible quote for every occasion, did Mr. Sam Norton,
and whenever you meet a man like that, my best advice to you would be to grin
big and cover up your balls with both hands.

There were less infirmary cases than in the days of Greg Stammas, and so far as
I know the moonlight burials ceased altogether, but this is not to say that

Norton was not a believer in punishment. Solitary was always well populated. Men
lost their teeth not from beatings but from bread and water diets. It began to

be called grain and drain, as in "I'm on the Sam Norton grain and drain train,
boys."

The man was the foulest hypocrite that I ever saw in a high position. The
rackets I told you about earlier continued to flourish, but Sam Norton added his
own new wrinkles. Andy knew about them all, and because we had gotten to be

pretty good friends by that time, he let me in on some of them. When Andy talked
about them, an expression of amused, disgusted wonder would come over his face,
as if he were telling me about some ugly, predatory species of bug that was, by

its very ugliness and greed, somehow more comic than terrible.

It was Warden Norton who instituted the "Inside-Out" program you may have read
about some sixteen or seventeen years back; it was even written up in Newsweek.
In the press it sounded like a real advance in practical corrections and
rehabilitation. There were prisoners out cutting pulpwood, prisoners repairing
bridges           and causeways, prisoners constructing potato cellars. Norton 
called it
"Inside-Out" and was invited to explain it to damn near every Rotary and Kiwanis
club           in New England, especially after he got his picture in Newsweek. 
The
prisoners called it "road-ganging," but so far as I know, none of them were ever
invited    to express their views to the Kiwanians or the Loyal Order of Moose.

Norton was right in there on every operation, thirty-year churchpin and all;
from cutting pulp to digging storm-drains to laying new culverts under state

highways, there was Norton, skimming off the top. There were a hundred ways to
do it-men, materials, you name it. But he had it coming another way, as well.

The construction businesses in the area were deathly afraid of Norton's

Inside-Out program, because prison labor is slave labor, and you can't compete
with that. So Sam Norton, he of the Testaments and the thirty-year church-pin,
was passed a good many thick envelopes under the table during his sixteen-year
tenure as Shawshank's warden. And when an envelope was passed, he would either


overbid the project, not bid at all, or claim that all his Inside-Outers were
committed elsewhere. It has always been something of a wonder to me that Norton
was never found in the trunk of a Thunderbird parked off a highway somewhere
down in Massachusetts with his hands tied behind his back and half a dozen

bullets in his head.

Anyway, as the old barrelhouse song says, My God, how the money rolled in.
Norton must have subscribed to the old Puritan notion that the best way to
figure out which folks God favors is by checking their bank accounts.

Andy Dufresne was his right hand in all of this, his silent partner. The prison
library was Andy's hostage to fortune. Norton knew it, and Norton used it. Andy
told me that one of Norton's favorite aphorisms was One hand washes the other.
So Andy gave good advice and made useful suggestions. I can't say for sure that
he handtooled Norton's Inside-Out program, but I'm damned sure he processed the
money for the Jesus-shouting son of a whore. He gave good advice, made useful
suggestions, the money got spread around, and . . . son of a bitch! The library
would           get a new set of automotive repair manuals, a fresh set of 
Grolier
Encyclopedias, books on how to prepare for the Scholastic Achievement Tests.

And, of course, more Erle Stanley Gardners and more Louis L'Amours.

And I'm convinced that what happened happened because Norton just didn't want to
lose his good right hand. I'll go further: it happened because he was scared of

what might happen-what Andy might say against him-if Andy ever got clear of
Shawshank State Prison.

I got the story a chunk here and a chunk there over a space of seven years, some
of it from Andy-but not all. He never wanted to talk about that part of his

life, and I don't blame him. I got parts of it from maybe half a dozen different
sources. I've said once that prisoners are nothing but slaves, but they have

that slave habit of looking dumb and keeping their ears open. I got it backwards
and forwards and in the middle, but I'll give it to you from point A to point Z.
and maybe you'll understand why the man spent about ten months in a bleak,
depressed daze. See, I don't think he knew the truth until 1963, fifteen years
after        he came into this sweet little hellhole. Until he met Tommy 
Williams, I
don't think he knew how bad it could get.

Tommy Williams joined our happy little Shawshank family in November of 1962.
Tommy thought of himself as a native of Massachusetts, but he wasn't proud; in
his twenty-seven years he'd done time all over New England. He was a
professional thief, and as you may have guessed, my own feeling was that he
should have picked another profession.

He was a married man, and his wife came to visit each and every week. She had an
idea that things might go better with Tommy- and consequently better with their


three-year-old son and herself- if he got his high school degree. She talked him
into it, and so Tommy Williams started visiting the library on a regular basis.

For Andy, this was an old routine by then. He saw that Tommy got a series of
high school equivalency tests. Tommy would brush up on the subjects he had
passed in high school-there weren't many-and then take the test. Andy also saw
that  he was enrolled in a number of correspondence courses covering the 
subjects
he had failed in school or just missed by dropping out.

He probably wasn't the best student Andy ever took over the jumps, and I don't
know if he ever did get his high school diploma, but that forms no part of my
story. The important thing was that he came to like Andy Dufresne very much, as
most people did after awhile.

On a couple of occasions he asked Andy "what a smart guy like you is doing in
the joint"-a question which is the rough equivalent of that one that goes
"What's a nice girl like you doing in a place like this?" But Andy wasn't the
type to tell him; he would only smile and turn the conversation into some other

channel. Quite normally, Tommy asked someone else, and when he finally got the
story, I guess he also got the shock of his young life.

The person he asked was his partner on the laundry's steam ironer and folder.
The inmates call this device the mangler, because that's exactly what it will do
to you if you aren't paying attention and get your bad self caught in it. His

partner was Charlie Lathrop, who had been in for about twelve years on a murder
charge. He was more than glad to reheat the details of the Dufresne murder trial
for Tommy; it broke the monotony of pulling freshly pressed bedsheets out of the
machine and tucking them into the basket. He was just getting to the jury

waiting until after lunch to bring in their guilty verdict when the trouble
whistle went off and the mangle grated to a stop. They had been feeding in
freshly washed sheets from the Eliot Nursing Home at the far end; these were
spat out dry and neatly pressed at Tommy's and Charlie's end at the rate of one
every five seconds. Their job was to grab them, fold them, and slap them into
the cart, which had already been lined with clean brown paper.

But Tommy Williams was just standing there, staring at Charlie Lathrop, his
mouth unhinged all the way to his chest. He was standing in a drift of sheets

that had come through clean and which were now sopping up all the wet muck on
the floor-and in a laundry wetwash, there's plenty of muck.

So the head bull that day, Homer Jessup, comes rushing over, bellowing his head
off and on the prod for trouble. Tommy took no notice of him. He spoke to
Charlie as if old Homer, who had busted more heads than he could probably count,
hadn't been there.


"What did you say that golf pro's name was?"

"Quentin," Charlie answered back, all confused and upset by now. He later said
that the kid was as white as a truce flag. "Glenn Quentin, I think. Something
like that, anyway-"

"Here now, here now," Homer Jessup roared, his neck as red as a roosters comb.
"Get them sheets in cold water! Get quick! Get quick, by Jesus, you-"

"Glenn Quentin, oh my God," Tommy Williams said, and that was all he got to say
because Homer Jessup, that least peaceable of men, brought his billy down behind
his ear. Tommy hit the floor so hard he broke off three of his front teeth. 
When

he woke up he was in solitary, and confined to same for a week, riding a boxcar
on Sam Norton's famous grain and drain train. Plus a black mark on his report
card.

That was in early February of 1963, and Tommy Williams went around to six or
seven other long-timers after he got out of solitary and got pretty much the

same story. I know; I was one of them. But when I asked him why he wanted it, he
just clammed up.

Then one day he went to the library and spilled one helluva big budget of
information to Andy Dufresne. And for the first and last time, at least since he
had approached me about the Rita Hayworth poster like a kid buying his first
pack of Trojans, Andy lost his cool . . . only this time he blew it entirely.

I saw him later that day, and he looked like a man who has stepped on the
business end of a rake and given himself a good one, whap between the eyes. His
hands were trembling, and when I spoke to him, he didn't answer. Before that
afternoon was out he had caught up with Billy Hanlon, who was the head screw,
and     set up an appointment with Warden Norton for the following day. He told 
me
later that he didn't sleep a wink all that night; he just listened to a cold

winter wind howling outside, watched the searchlights go around and around,
putting long, moving shadows on the cement walls of the cage he had called home
since Harry Truman was President, and tried to think it all out. He said it was

as if Tommy had produced a key which fit a cage in the back of his mind, a cage
like his own cell. Only instead of holding a man, that cage held a tiger, and

that tiger's name was Hope. Williams had produced the key that unlocked the cage
and the tiger was out, willy-nilly, to roam his brain.

Four years before, Tommy Williams had been arrested in Rhode Island, driving a
stolen car that was full of stolen merchandise. Tommy turned in his accomplice,
the DA played ball, and he got a lighter sentence . . . two to four, with time
served. Eleven months after beginning his term, his old cellmate got a ticket

out and Tommy got a new one, a man named Elwood Blatch. Blatch had been busted


for burglary with a weapon and was serving six to twelve.

"I never seen such a high-strung guy," Tommy told me. "A man like that should
never want to be a burglar, specially not with a gun. The slightest little

noise, he'd go three feet into the air . . . and come down shooting, more likely
than not. One night he almost strangled me because some guy down the hall was
whopping on his cell bars with a tin cup.

"I did seven months with him, until they let me walk free. I got time served and
time off, you understand. I can't say we talked because you didn't, you know,
exactly hold a conversation with El Blatch. He held a conversation with you. He
talked all the time. Never shut up. If you tried to get a word in, he'd shake

his fist at you and roll his eyes. It gave me the cold chills whenever he done
that. Big tall guy he was, mostly bald, with these green eyes set way down deep
in the sockets. Jeez, I hope I never see him again.

"It was like a talkin jag every night. Where he grew up, the orphanages he run
away from, the jobs he done, the women he fucked, the crap games he cleaned out.
I just let him run on. My face ain't much, but I didn't want it, you know,

rearranged for me.

"According to him, he'd burgled over two hundred joints. It was hard for me to
believe, a guy like him who went off like a firecracker every time someone cut a
loud fart, but he swore it was true. Now . . . listen to me, Red. I know guys
sometimes make things up after they know a thing, but even before I knew about
this golf pro guy, Quentin, I remember thinking that if El Blatch ever burgled

my house, and I found out about it later, I'd have to count myself just about
the luckiest motherfucker going still to be alive. Can you imagine him in some
lady's bedroom, sifting through her jool'ry box, and she coughs in her sleep or
turns over quick? It gives me the cold chills just to think of something like
that,   I swear on my mother's name it does.

"He said he'd killed people, too. People that gave him shit. At least that's

what he said. And I believed him. He sure looked like a man that could do some
killing. He was just so fucking highstrung! Like a pistol with a sawed-off

firing pin. I knew a guy who had a Smith and Wesson Police Special with a
sawed-off firing pin. It wasn't no good for nothing, except maybe for something
to      jaw about. The pull on that gun was so light that it would fire if this 
guy,
Johnny Callahan, his name was, if he turned his record-player on full volume and
put  it on top of one of the speakers. That's how El Blatch was. I can't 
explain

it any better. I just never doubted that he had greased some people.

"So one night, just for something to say, I go: 'Who'd you kill?' Like a joke,

you know. So he laughs and says: 'There's one guy doing time up-Maine for these
two people I killed. It was this guy and the wife of the slob who's doing the


time. I was creeping their place and the guy started to give me some shit.'

"I can't remember if he ever told me the woman's name or not," Tommy went on.
"Maybe he did. But in New England, Dufresne's like Smith or Jones in the rest of
the country, because there's so many Frogs up here. Dufresne, Lavesque,

Ouelette, Poulin, who can remember Frog names? But he told me the guy's name. He
said the guy was Glenn Quentin and he was a prick, a big rich prick, a golf 
pro.

El said he thought the guy might have cash in the house, maybe as much as five
thousand dollars. That was a lot of money back then, he says to me. So I go:
'When was that?' And he goes: 'After the war. Just after the war.'

"So he went in and he did the joint and they woke up and the guy gave him some
trouble. That's what El said. Maybe the guy just started to snore, that's what 
I

say. Anyway, El said Quentin was in the sack with some hotshot lawyer's wife and
they sent the lawyer up to Shawshank State Prison. Then he laughs this big

laugh. Holy Christ, I was never so glad of anything as I was when I got my
walking papers from that place."
