He renewed his request and renewed it. He was patient. He had nothing but time. 
It got to
be summer. In Washington, President Kennedy was promising a fresh assault on 
poverty
and on civil rights inequalities, not knowing he had only half a year to live. 
In Liverpool, a
musical group called The Beatles was emerging as a force to be reckoned with in 
British
music, but I guess that no one Stateside had yet heard of them. The Boston Red 
Sox, still
four years away from what New England folks call The Miracle of '67, were 
languishing in
the cellar of the American League. All of those things were going on out in a 
larger world
where people walked free.

Norton saw him near the end of June, and this conversation I heard about from 
Andy
himself some seven years later.

"If it's the squeeze, you don't have to worry," Andy told Norton in a low 
voice. "Do you
think I'd talk that up? I'd be cutting my own throat. I'd be just as indictable 
as -- "

"That's enough," Norton interrupted. His face was as long and cold as a slate 
gravestone.
He leaned back in his office chair until the back of his head almost touched 
the sampler
reading    HIS JUDGMENT COMETH AND THAT RIGHT EARLY.

"But-"

"Don't you ever mention money to me again," Norton said. "Not in this office, 
not
anywhere. Not unless you want to see that library turned back into a storage 
room and
paint-locker again. Do you understand?"

"I was trying to set your mind at ease, that's all."

"Well, now, when I need a sorry son of a bitch like you to set my mind at ease, 
I'll retire. I
agreed to this appointment because I got tired of being pestered, Dufresne. I 
want it to
stop. If you want to buy this particular Brooklyn Bridge, that's your affair. 
Don't make it
mine. I could hear crazy stories like yours twice a week if I wanted to lay 
myself open to
them. Every sinner in this place would be using me for a crying towel. I had 
more respect
for you. But this is the end. The end. Have we got an understanding?"

"Yes," Andy said. "But I'll be hiring a lawyer, you know."
"What in God's name for?"

"I think we can put it together," Andy said. "With Tommy Williams and with my
testimony and corroborative testimony from records and employees at the country 
club, I
think we can put it together. "

"Tommy Williams is no longer an inmate of this facility."
"What?"


"He's been transferred."
"Transferred where?"
"Cashman.   "

At that, Andy fell silent. He was an intelligent man, but it would have taken an
extraordinarily stupid man not to smell deal all over that. Cashman was a 
minimum-
security          prison far up north in Aroostook County. The inmates pick a 
lot of potatoes, and
that's hard work, but they are paid a decent wage for their labor and they can 
attend
classes  at CVI, a pretty decent vocational-technical institute, if they so 
desire. More
important to a fellow like Tommy, a fellow with a young wife and a child, 
Cashman had a
furlough program . . . which meant a chance to live like a normal man, at least 
on the
weekends. A chance to build a model plane with his kid, have sex with his wife, 
maybe go
on         a picnic.

Norton had almost surely dangled all of that under Tommy's nose with only one
string attached: not one more word about Elwood Blatch, not now, not ever. Or
you'll end up doing hard time in Thomaston down there on scenic Route 1 with the
real hard guys, and instead of having sex with your wife you'll be having it

with some old bull queer.

"But why?" Andy said. "Why would-"

"As a favor to you," Norton said calmly, "I checked with Rhode Island. They did
have an inmate named Elwood Blatch. He was given what they call a PP-provisional
parole, another one of these crazy liberal programs to put criminals out on the
streets. He's since disappeared. "

Andy said: "The warden down there . . . is he a friend of yours?"

Sam Norton gave Andy a smile as cold as a deacon's watch chain. "We are
acquainted," he said.

"Why?" Andy repeated. "Can't you tell me why you did it? You knew I wasn't going
to talk about . . . about anything you might have had going. You knew that. So
why?"

"Because people like you make me sick," Norton said deliberately. "I like you

right where you are, Mr. Dufresne, and as long as I am warden here at Shawshank,
you are going to be right here. You see, you used to think that you were better
than anyone else. I have gotten pretty good at seeing that on a man's face. I
marked   it on yours the first time I walked into the library. It might as well

have been written on your forehead in capital letters. That look is gone now,


and I like that just fine. It is not just that you are a useful vessel, never

think that. It is simply that men like you need to learn humility. Why, you used
to walk around that exercise yard as if it was a living room and you were at one
of those cocktail parties where the hellbound walk around coveting each others'
wives and husbands and getting swinishly drunk. But you don't walk around that
way anymore. And I'll be watching to see if you should start to walk that way
again. Over a period of years, I'll be watching you ,with great pleasure. Now

get the hell out of here."

"Okay. But all the extracurricular activities stop now, Norton The investment
counseling, the scams, the free tax advice. It all stops. Get H and R Block to
tell       you how to declare your income.

Warden Norton's face first went brick-red . . . and then all the color fell out
of it. "You're going back into solitary for that. Thirty days. Bread and water.

Another black mark. And while you're in think about this: if anything that's
been going on should stop, the library goes. I will make it my personal 
business

to see that it got back to what it was before you came here. And I will make you
life . . . very hard. Very difficult. You'll do the hardest time it possible to

do. You'll lose that one-bunk Hilton down in Cellblock Five, for starters, and
you'll lose those rocks on the windowsill, an you'll lose any protection the
guards have given you against the sodomites. You will . . . lose everything.

Clear?"

I guess it was clear enough.
