Now I'm going to tell you what happened in mid-May of 1950 that finally ended
Andy's three-year series of skirmishes with the sisters. It was also the

incident which eventually got him out of the laundry and into the library, where
he filled out his work-time until he left our happy little family earlier this

year.

You may have noticed how much of what I've told you already is hearsay-someone
saw something and told me and I told you. Well, in some cases I've simplified it
even more than it really was, and have repeated (or will repeat) fourth- or

fifth-hand information. That's the way it is here. The grapevine is very real,
and you have to use it if you're going to stay ahead. Also, of course, you have
to know how to pick out the grains of truth from the chaff of lies, rumors, and
wish-it-had-beens.

You may also have gotten the idea that I'm describing someone who's more legend
than man, and I would have to agree that there's some truth to that. To us

long-timers who knew Andy over a space of years, there was an element of fantasy
to him, a sense, almost, of myth-magic, if you get what I mean. That story I

passed on about Andy refusing to give Bogs Diamond a head-job is part of that
myth, and how he kept on fighting the sisters is part of it, and how he got the
library job is part of it, too . . . but with one important difference: I was

there and I saw what happened, and I swear on my mother's name that it's all
true. The oath of a convicted murderer may not be worth much, but believe this:
I don't lie.

Andy and I were on fair speaking terms by then. The guy fascinated me. Looking
back to the poster episode, I see there's one thing I neglected to tell you, and
maybe I should. Five weeks after he hung Rita up (I'd forgotten all about it by
then, and had gone on to other deals), Ernie passed a small white box through
the bars of my cell.

"From Dufresne," he said, low, and never missed a stroke with his push-broom.
"Thanks, Ernie," I said, and slipped him half a pack of Camels.

Now what the hell was this, I was wondering as I slipped the cover from the box.
There was a lot of white cotton inside, and below that . . .

I looked for a long time. For a few minutes it was like I didn't even dare touch
them, they were so pretty. There's a crying shortage of pretty things in the
slam, and the real pity of it is that a lot of men don't even seem to miss 
them.

There were two pieces of quartz in that box, both of them carefully polished.
They had been chipped into driftwood shapes. There were little sparkles of iron


pyrites in them like flecks of gold. If they hadn't been so heavy, they would
have served as a fine pair of men's cufflinks-they were that close to being a
matched set.

How much work went into creating those two pieces? Hours and hours after
lights-out, I knew that. First the chipping and shaping, and then the almost
endless polishing and finishing with those rock-blankets. Looking at them, I
felt the warmth that any man or woman feels when he or she is looking at

something pretty, something that has been worked and made-that's the thing that
really separates us from the animals, I think-and I felt something else, too. A
sense of awe for the man's brute persistence. But I never knew just how
persistent Andy Dufresne could be until much later.

In May of 1950, the powers that be decided that the roof of the license-plate
factory ought to be re-surfaced with roofing tar. They wanted it done before it
got too hot up there, and they asked for volunteers for the work, which was
planned to take about a week. More than seventy men spoke up, because it was

outside work and May is one damn fine month for outside work. Nine or ten names
were drawn out of a hat, and two of them happened to be Andy's and my own.

For the next week we'd be marched out to the exercise yard after breakfast, with
two guards up front and two more behind . . . plus all the guards in the towers
keeping a weather eye on the proceedings through their field-glasses for good
measure.

Four of us would be carrying a big extension ladder on those morning marches - I
always got a kick out of the way Dickie Betts, who was on that job, called that
sort of ladder an extensible - and we'd put it up against the side of that low,

flat building. Then we'd start bucket-brigading hot buckets of tar up to the
roof. Spill that shit on you and you'd jitterbug all the way to the infirmary.
There were six guards on the project, all of them picked on the basis of
seniority. It was almost as good as a week's vacation, because instead of
sweating it out in the laundry or the plate-shop or standing over a bunch of
cons cutting pulp or brush somewhere out in the fields, they were having a
regular May holiday in the sun, just sitting there with their backs up against
the low parapet, shooting the bull back and forth.

They didn't even have to keep more than half an eye on us, because the south
wall sentry post was close enough so that the fellows up there could have spit
their chews on us, if they'd wanted to. If anyone on the roof-sealing party had
made one funny move, it would take four seconds to cut him smack in two with

.45-caliber machine-gun bullets. So those screws just sat there and took their
ease. All they needed was a couple of six-packs buried in crushed ice, and they
would have been the lords of all creation.

One of them was a fellow named Byron Hadley, and in that year of 1950, he'd 
been


at Shawshank longer than I had. Longer than the last two wardens put together,
as a matter of fact. The fellow running the show in 1950 was a prissy-looking

down-east Yankee named George Dunahy. He had a degree in penal administration.
No one liked him, as far as I could tell, except the people who had gotten him 
his
appointment. I heard that he was only interested in three things: compiling

statistics for a book (which was later published by a small New England outfit
called Light Side Press, where he probably had to pay to have it done), which
team won the intramural baseball championship each September, and getting a
death-penalty law passed in Maine. A regular bear for the death penalty was
George Dunahy. He was fired from the job in 1953, when it came out he was
running a discount auto-repair service down in the prison garage and splitting

the profits with Byron Hadley and Greg Stammas. Hadley and Stammas came out of
that one okay-they were old hands at keeping their asses covered-but Dunahy took
a walk. No one was sorry to see him go, but nobody was exactly pleased to see
Greg Stammas step into his shoes, either. He was a short man with a tight, hard

gut and the coldest brown eyes you ever saw. He always had a painful, pursed
little grin on his face, as if he had to go to the bathroom and couldn't quite
manage it. During Stammas's tenure as warden there was a lot of brutality at

Shawshank, and although I have no proof, I believe there were maybe half a dozen
moonlight burials in the stand of scrub forest that lies east of the prison.

Dunahy was bad, but Greg Stammas was a cruel, wretched, cold-hearted man.

He and Byron Hadley were good friends. As warden, George Dunahy was nothing but
a posturing figurehead; it was Stammas, and through him, Hadley, who actually
administered the prison.

Hadley was a tall, shambling man with thinning red hair. He sunburned easily
and he talked loud and if you didn't move fast enough to suit him, he'd clout 
you
with his stick. On that day, our third on the roof, he was talking to another
guard named Mert Entwhistle.

Hadley had gotten some amazingly good news, so he was griping about it. That was
his style-he was a thankless man with not a good word for anyone, a man who was
convinced that the whole world was against him. The world had cheated him out of
the best years of his life, and the world would be more than happy to cheat him

out of the rest. I have seen some screws that I thought were almost saintly, and
I think I know why that happens -- they are able to see the difference between
their own lives, poor and struggling as they might be, and the lives of the men
they are paid by the State to watch over. These guards are able to formulate a
comparison concerning pain. Others can't, or won't.

For Byron Hadley there was no basis of comparison. He could sit there, cool and
at his ease under the warm May sun, and find the gall to mourn his own good luck
while less than ten feet away a bunch of men were working and sweating and
burning their hands on great big buckets filled with bubbling tar, men who had


to work so hard in their ordinary round of days that this looked like a 
respite.

You may remember the old question, the one that's supposed to define your
outlook on life when you answer it. For Byron Hadley the answer would always be
half empty, the glass is half empty. Forever and ever, amen. If you gave him a

cool drink of apple cider, he'd think about vinegar. If you told him his wife
had always been faithful to him, he'd tell you it was because she was so damn
ugly.

So there he sat, talking to Mert Entwhistle loud enough for all of us to hear,
his broad white forehead already starting to redden with the sun. He had one

hand thrown back over the low parapet surrounding the roof. The other was on the
butt of his .38.

We all got the story along with Mert. It seemed that Hadley's older brother had
gone off to Texas some fourteen years ago and the rest of the family hadn't
heard from the son of a bitch since. They had all assumed he was dead, and good
riddance. Then, a week and a half ago, a lawyer had called them long-distance
from Austin. It seemed that Hadley's brother had died four months ago, and a
rich man at that ("It's frigging incredible how lucky some assholes can get,"

this paragon of gratitude on the plate-shop roof said). The money had come as a
result of oil and oil-leases, and there was close to a million dollars.

No, Hadley wasn't a millionaire-that might have made even him happy, at least
for awhile-but the brother had left a pretty damned decent bequest of

thirty-five thousand dollars to each surviving member of his family back in
Maine, if they could be found. Not bad. Like getting lucky and winning a
sweepstakes.

But to Byron Hadley the glass was always half empty. He spent most of the
morning bitching to Mert about the bite that the goddam government was going to
take out of his windfall. "They'll leave me about enough to buy a new car with,"
he allowed, "and then what happens? You have to pay the damn taxes on the car,
and the repairs and maintenance, you got your goddam kids pestering you to take
'em for a ride with the top down-"

"And to drive it, if they're old enough," Mert said. Old Mert Entwhistle knew
which side his bread was buttered on, and he didn't say what must have been as
obvious to him as to the rest of us: If that money's worrying you so bad, Byron
old kid old sock, I'll just take it off your hands. After all, what are friends

for?

"That's right, wanting to drive it, wanting to learn to drive on it, for
Chrissake," Byron said with a shudder. "Then what happens at the end of the
year?         If you figured the tax wrong and you don't have enough left over 
to pay
the overdraft, you got to pay out of your own pocket, or maybe even borrow it

from one of those kikey loan agencies. And they audit you anyway, you know. It


don't matter. And when the government audits you, they always take more. Who can
fight Uncle Sam? He puts his hand inside your shirt and squeezes your tit until

it's purple, and you end up getting the short end. Christ."

He lapsed into a morose silence, thinking of what terrible bad luck he'd had to
inherit that thirty-five thousand dollars. Andy Dufresne had been spreading tar
with a big brush less than fifteen feet away and now he tossed it into his

pail and walked over to where Mert and Hadley were sitting.

We all tightened up, and I saw one of the other screws, Tim Youngblood, drag his
hand down to where his pistol was holstered. One of the fellows in the sentry
tower struck his partner on the arm and they both turned, too. For one moment I
thought Andy was going to get shot, or clubbed, or both.

Then he said, very softly, to Hadley: "Do you trust your wife?"

Hadley just stared at him. He was starting to get red in the face, and I knew
that was a bad sign. In about three seconds he was going to pull his billy club
and give Andy the butt end of it right in the solar plexus, where that big 
bundle
of nerves is. A hard enough hit there can kill you, but they always go for it. 
If
it doesn't kill you it will paralyze you long enough to forget whatever cute
move it was that you had planned.

"Boy," Hadley said, "I'll give you just one chance to pick up that brush. And
then you're goin' off this roof on your head."

Andy just looked at him, very calm and still. His eyes were like ice. It was as
if he hadn't heard. And I found myself wanting to tell him how it was, to give
him the crash course. The crash course is you never let on that you hear the
guards talking, you never try to horn in on their conversation unless you're
asked (and then you always tell them just what they want to hear and shut up
again). Black man, white man, red man, yellow man, in prison it doesn't matter

because we've got our own brand of equality. In prison every con's a low life, 
and
you have to get used to the idea if you intend to survive men like Hadley and

Greg Stammas, who really would kill you just as soon as look at you. When you're
in stir you belong to the State and if you forget it, woe is you. I've known men
who've lost eyes, men who've lost toes and fingers; I knew one man who lost the
tip     of his penis and counted himself lucky that was all he lost. I wanted 
to

tell Andy that it was already too late. He could go back and pick up his brush
and there would still be some big lug waiting for him in the showers that night,
ready to charley-horse both of his legs and leave him writhing on the cement.
You could buy a lug like that for a pack of cigarettes or three Baby Ruths. Most
of all, I wanted to tell him not to make it any worse than it already was.

What I did was to keep on running tar out onto the roof as if nothing at all 
was


happening. Like everyone else, I look after my own ass first. I have to. It's
cracked already, and in Shawshank there have always been Hadleys willing to
finish the job of breaking it.

Andy said, "Maybe I put it wrong. Whether you trust her or not is immaterial.
The problem is whether or not you believe she would ever go behind your back,
try to hamstring you."

Hadley got Up. Mert got up. Tim Youngblood got up. Hadley's face was as red as
the side of a brick house. "Your only problem," he said, "is going to be how 
many
bones you still got unbroken. You can count them in the infirmary. Come on,
Mert. We're throwing this sucker over the side."

Tim Youngblood drew his gun. The rest of us kept tarring like mad. The sun beat
down. They were going to do it; Hadley and Mert were simply going to pitch him
over the side. Terrible accident. Dufresne, prisoner 81433-SHNK, was taking a
couple of empties down and slipped on the ladder. Too bad.

They laid hold of him, Mert on the right arm, Hadley on the left. Andy didn't
resist. His eyes never left Hadley's red face.

"If you've got your thumb on her, Mr. Hadley," he said in that same calm,
composed voice, "there's not a reason why you shouldn't have every cent of that
money. Final score, Mr. Byron Hadley thirty-five thousand, Uncle Sam zip."
Mert started to drag him toward the edge.

Hadley just stood there. For a moment Andy was like a rope between them in a 
tug-of-war
game. Then Hadley said, "Hold on one second, Mert. What do you mean, boy?"

"I mean, if you've got your thumb on your wife, you can give it to her," Andy
said.

"You better start making sense, boy, or you're going over."

"The IRS allows you a one-time-only gift to your spouse," Andy said. "It's good
up to sixty thousand dollars."

Hadley was now looking at Andy as if he had been poleaxed.
"Naw, that ain't right," he said. "Tax free?"

"Tax free," Andy said. "IRS can't touch cent one."
"How would you know a thing like that?"


Tim Youngblood said: "He used to be a banker, Byron. I s'pose he might-"
"Shut ya head, Trout," Hadley said without looking at him.

Tim Youngblood flushed and shut up.  Some of the guards called him Trout 
because of
his thick lips and buggy eyes.  Hadley kept looking at Andy. "You're the smart

banker who shot his wife. Why should I believe a smart banker like you? So I can
wind up in here breaking rocks right alongside you? You'd like that, wouldn't
you?"

Andy said quietly: "If you went to jail for tax evasion, you'd go to a federal
penitentiary, not Shawshank. But you won't. The tax-free gift to the spouse is a
perfectly legal loophole. I've done dozens . . . no, hundreds of them. It's

meant primarily for people with small businesses to pass on, or for people who
come into one-time-only windfalls. Like yourself."

"I think you're lying," Hadley said, but he didn't-you could see he didn't.

There was an emotion dawning on his face, something that was grotesque overlying
that long, ugly countenance and that receding, sunburned brow. An almost obscene
emotion when seen on the features of Byron Hadley. It was hope.

"No, I'm not lying. There's no reason why you should take my word for it,
either. Engage a lawyer-"

"Ambulance-chasing highway-robbing sob’s!" Hadley cried.

Andy shrugged. "Then go to the IRS. They'll tell you the same thing for free.
Actually, you don't need me to tell you at all. You would have investigated the
matter for yourself."

"You’re right. I don't need any smart wife-killing banker to show me where the
bears go in the woods."

"You'll need a tax lawyer or a banker to set up the gift for you and that will
cost you something," Andy said. "Or . . . if you were interested, I'd be glad to
set it up for you nearly free of charge. The price would be three beers apiece
for my co-workers-"

"Co-workers," Mert said, and let out a rusty guffaw. He slapped his knee. A real
knee-slapper was old Mert, and I hope he died of intestinal cancer in a part of
the world where morphine is as of yet undiscovered. "Co-workers, ain't that
cute? Co-workers! You ain't got any-"

"Shut your friggin trap," Hadley growled, and Mert shut. Hadley looked at Andy
again. "What was you saying


"I was saying that I'd only ask three beers apiece for my coworkers, if that
seems fair," Andy said. "I think a man feels more like a man when he's working
out of doors in the springtime if he can have a bottle of suds. That's only my
opinion. It would go down smooth, and I'm sure you'd have their gratitude."

I have talked to some of the other men who were up there that day - Rennie 
Martin,
Logan St. Pierre, and Paul Bonsaint were three of them - and we all saw the same
thing then . . . felt the same thing. Suddenly it was Andy who had the upper

hand. It was Hadley who had the gun on his hip and the billy in his hand, Hadley
who had his friend Greg Stammas behind him and the whole prison administration
behind Stammas, the whole power of the State behind that, but all at once in

that golden sunshine it didn't matter, and I felt my heart leap up in my chest

as it never had since the truck drove me and four others through the gate back
in 1938 and I stepped out into the exercise yard.

Andy was looking at Hadley with those cold, clear, calm eyes, and it wasn't just
the thirty-five thousand then, we all agreed on that. I've played it over and

over in my mind and I know. It was man against man, and Andy simply forced
him, the way a strong man can force a weaker man's wrist to the table in a game
of Indian rasseling. There was no reason, you see, why Hadley couldn't've given
Mert the nod at that very minute, pitched Andy overside onto his head, and still
taken Andy's advice.  No reason. But he didn't.

"I could get you all a couple of beers if I wanted to," Hadley said. "A beer

does taste good while you're working The colossal bastard even managed to sound
magnanimous.

"I'd just give you one piece of advice the IRS wouldn't bother with," Andy said.
His eyes were Axed unwinkingly on Hadley's. "Make the gift to your wife if
you're sure. If you think there's even a chance she might double-cross you or
backshoot you, we could work out something else -- "

"Double-cross me?" Hadley asked harshly. "Double-cross me? Mr. Hotshot Banker,
if she ate her way through a boxcar of Ex-Lax, she wouldn't dare fart unless I

gave her the nod."

Mert, Youngblood, and the other screws yucked it up dutifully. Andy never
cracked a smile.

"I'll write down the forms you need," he said. "You can get them at the post
office, and I'll fill them out for your signature."

That sounded suitably important, and Hadley's chest swelled. Then he glared
around at the rest of us and hollered, "What are you jimmies starin at? Move


your asses, goddammit!" He looked back at Andy. "You come over here with me,
hotshot. And listen to me well: if you're messin’ me somehow, you're gonna find
yourself chasing your own head around Shower C before the week's out."

"Yes, I understand that," Andy said softly.

And he did understand it. The way it turned out, he understood a lot more than I
did - more than any of us did.

That's how, on the second-to-last day of the job, the convict crew that tarred
the plate-factory roof in 1950 ended up sitting in a row at ten o'clock on a
spring morning, drinking Black Label beer supplied by the hardest screw that
ever walked a turn at Shawshank State Prison. That beer was warm, but it
was still the best I ever had in my life. We sat and drank it and felt the sun

on our shoulders, and not even the expression of half-amusement, half-contempt
on Hadley's face-as if he were watching apes drink beer instead of men-could
spoil it. It lasted twenty minutes, that beer-break, and for those twenty

minutes we felt like free men. We could have been drinking beer and tarring the
roof of one of our own houses.

Only Andy didn't drink. I already told you about his drinking habits. He sat
hunkered down in the shade, hands dangling between his knees, watching us and
smiling a little. It's amazing how many men remember him that way, and amazing

how many men were on that work-crew when Andy Dufresne faced down Byron Hadley.

I thought there were nine or ten of us, but by 1955 there must have been two
hundred of us, maybe more . . . if you believed what you heard.

So, yeah-if you asked me to give you a flat-out answer to the question of
whether I'm trying to tell you about a man or a legend that got made up around
the man, like a pearl around a little piece of grit-I'd have to say that the

answer lies somewhere in between. All I know for sure is that Andy Dufresne
wasn't much like me or anyone else I ever knew since I came inside. He brought

in five hundred dollars jammed up his back porch, but somehow that graymeat son
of a bitch managed to bring in something else as well. A sense of his own worth,
maybe, or a feeling that he would be the winner in the end . . . or maybe it was
only        a sense of freedom, even inside these goddamned gray walls. It was 
a kind

of inner light he carried around with him. I only knew him to lose that light
once, and that is also a part of this story.
