
I never expected to take up this narrative again, but here I am with the

dog-eared, folded pages open on the desk in front of me. Here I am adding
another three or four pages, writing in a brand-new tablet. A tablet I bought in
a store-I just walked into a store on Portland's Congress Street and bought it.
I thought I had put finish to my story in a Shawshank prison cell on a bleak
January day in 1976. Now it's May of 1977 and I am sitting in a small, cheap
room of the Brewster Hotel in Portland, adding to it.

The window is open, and the sound of the traffic floating in seem huge,
exciting, and intimidating. I have to look constantly over at the window and
reassure myself that there are no bars on it. I sleep poorly at night because

the bed in this room, as cheap as the room is, seems much too big and luxurious.
I snap awake every morning promptly at six-thirty, feeling disoriented and
frightened. M) dreams are bad. I have a crazy feeling of free fall. The

sensation is as terrifying as it is exhilarating.

What has happened in my life? Can't you guess? I was paroled. After 
thirty-eight


years of routine hearings and routine denials (in the course of those

thirty-eight years, three lawyers died on me), my parole was granted. I suppose
they decided that, at the age of fifty-eight, I was finally used up enough to be
deemed safe.

I came very close to burning the document you have just read. They search
outgoing parolees almost as carefully as they search incoming "new fish." And
beyond containing enough dynamite to assure me of a quick turnaround and another
six  or eight years inside, my "memoirs" contained something else: the name of

the town where I believe Andy Dufresne to be. Mexican police gladly cooperate
with the American police, and I didn't want my freedom-or my unwillingness to
give up the story I'd worked so long and hard to write-to cost Andy his.

Then I remembered how Andy had brought in his five hundred dollars back in 1948,
and I took out my story of him the same way. Just to be on the safe side, I

carefully rewrote each page which mentioned Zihuatanejo. If the papers had been
found during my "outside search," as they call it at The Shank, I would have
gone back in on turnaround . . . but the cops would have been looking for Andy
in   a Peruvian seacoast town named Las Intrudres.

The Parole Committee got me a job as a "stock-room assistant" at 310 the big
FoodWay Market at the Spruce Mall in South Portland - which means I became just
one more aging bag-boy. There's only two kinds of bag-boys, you know; the old
ones and the young ones. No one ever looks at either kind. If you shop at the
Spruce Mall FoodWay, I may have even taken your groceries out to your car . . .
but you'd have had to have shopped there between March and April of 1977,
because that's as long as I worked there.

At first I didn't think I was going to be able to make it on the outside at 
all.

I've described prison society as a scaled-down model of your outside world, but

I had no idea of how fast things moved on the outside; the raw speed people move
at. They even talk faster. And louder.

It was the toughest adjustment I've ever had to make, and I haven't finished
making it yet . . . not by a long way. Women, for instance. After hardly knowing
that they were half of the human race for forty years, I was suddenly working in
a store filled with them. Old women, pregnant women wearing tee-shirts with

arrows pointing downward and a printed motto reading BABY HERE, skinny women
with their nipples poking out at their shirts-a woman wearing something like

that when I went in would have gotten arrested and then had a sanity
hearing-women of every shape and size. I found myself going around with a
semi-hard almost all the time and cursing myself for being a dirty old man.

Going to the bathroom, that was another thing. When I had to go (and the urge
always came on me at twenty-five past the hour), I had to fight the almost
overwhelming need to check it with my boss. Knowing that was something I could


just go and do in this too bright outside world was one thing; adjusting my
inner self to that knowledge after all those years of checking it with the
nearest screwhead or facing two days in solitary for the oversight . . . that
was something else.

My boss didn't like me. He was a young guy, twenty-six or -seven, and I could
see that I sort of disgusted him, the way a cringing, servile old dog that

crawls up to you on its belly to be petted will disgust a man. Christ, I
disgusted myself. But . . . I couldn't make myself stop. I wanted to tell him:

That's what a whole life in prison does for you, young man. It turns everyone in
a position of authority into a master, and you into every master's dog. Maybe
you know you've become a dog, even in prison, but since everyone else in gray is
a dog, too, it doesn't seem to matter so much. Outside, it does. But I couldn't

tell a young guy like him. He would never understand. Neither would my PO, a
big, bluff ex-Navy man with a huge red beard and a large stock of Polish jokes.
He saw me for about five minutes every week. "Are you staying out of the bars,
Red?" he'd ask when he'd run out of Polish jokes. I'd say yeah, and that would
be the end of it until next week.

Music on the radio. When I went in, the big bands were just getting up a good
head of steam. Now every song sounds like it's about fucking. So many cars. At
first I felt like I was taking my life into my hands every time I crossed the
street.

There was more-everything was strange and frightening-but maybe you get the
idea, or can at least grasp a corner of it. I began to think about doing

something to get back in. When you're on parole, almost anything will serve. I'm
ashamed to say it, but I began to think about stealing some money or shoplifting
stuff from the FoodWay, anything, to get back in where it was quiet and you knew
everything that was going to come up in the course of the day.

If I had never known Andy, I probably would have done that. But I kept thinking
of him, spending all those years chipping patiently away at the cement with his
rock-hammer so he could be free. I thought of that and it made me ashamed and
I'd         drop the idea again. Oh, you can say he had more reason to be free 
than I

did- he had a new identity and a lot of money. But that's not really true, you
know. Because he didn't know for sure that the new identity was still there, and
without the new identity, the money would always be out of reach. No, what he
needed was just to be free, and if I kicked away what I had, it would be like
spitting in the face of everything he had worked so hard to win back.

So what I started to do on my time off was to hitchhike rides down to the little
town of Buxton. This was in the early April of 1977, the snow just starting to
melt off the fields, the air just beginning to be warm, the baseball teams

coming north to start a new season playing the only game I'm sure God approves


of. When I went on these trips, I carried a Silva compass in my pocket.
There's a big hay field in Buxton, Andy had said, and at the north end of that
hayfield there's a rock wall, right oat of a Robert Frost poem. And somewhere
along the base of that wall is a rock that has no earthly business in a Maine
hayfield.

A fool's errand, you say. How many hayfields are there in a small rural town
like Buxton? Fifty? A hundred? Speaking from personal experience, I'd put it at
even higher than that, if you add in the fields now cultivated which might have
been haygrass when Andy went in. And if I did find the right one, I might never
know it. Because I might overlook that black piece of volcanic glass, or, much
more likely, Andy put it into his pocket and took it with him.

So I'd agree with you. A fool's errand, no doubt about it. Worse, a dangerous
one for a man on parole, because some of those fields were clearly marked with

NO TRESPASSING signs. And, as I've said, they're more than happy to slam your
ass back inside if you get out of line. A fool's errand . . . but so is 
chipping

at a blank concrete wall for twenty-seven years. And when you're no longer the
man who can get it for you and just an old bag-boy, it's nice to have a hobby to
take your mind off your new life. My hobby was looking for Andy's rock.

So I'd hitchhike to Buxton and walk the roads. I'd listen to the birds, to the
spring runoff in the culverts, examine the bottles the retreating snows had
revealed-all useless non-returnables, I am sorry to say; the world seems to have
gotten awfully spendthrift since I went into the slam-and looking for 
hayfields.

Most of them could be eliminated right off. No rock walls. Others had rock
walls, but my compass told me they were facing the wrong direction. I walked
these wrong ones anyway. It was a comfortable thing to be doing, and on those
outings I really felt free, at peace. An old dog walked with me one Saturday.

And one day I saw a winter-skinny deer.

Then came April 23rd, a day I'll not forget even if I live another fifty-eight
years. It was a balmy Saturday afternoon, and I was walking up what a little 
boy

fishing from a bridge told me was called The Old Smith Road. I had taken a lunch
in a brown FoodWay bag, and had eaten it sitting on a rock by the road. When

I was done I carefully buried my leavings, as my dad taught me before he died,
when I was a sprat no older than the fisherman who had named the road for me.
Around two o'clock I came to a big field on my left. There was a stone wall at
the    far end of it, running roughly northwest. I walked back to it, squelching
over the wet ground, and began to walk the wall. A squirrel scoffed me from an
oak tree.

Three-quarters of the way to the end, I saw the rock. No mistake. Black glass
and as smooth as silk. A rock with no earthly business in a Maine hayfield. For
a long time I just looked at it, feeling that I might cry, for whatever reason.


The squirrel had followed me, and it was still chattering away. My heart was
beating madly.

When I felt I had myself under control, I went to the rock, squatted beside
it-the joints in my knees went off like a double-barreled shotgun-and let my

hand touch it. It was real. I didn't pick it up because I thought there would be
anything under it; I could just as easily have walked away without finding what
was beneath. I certainly Clad no plans to take it away with me, because I didn't
feel it was mine to take-I had a feeling that taking that rock from the field
would have been the worst kind of theft. No, I only picked it up to feel it
better, to get the heft of the thing, and, I suppose, to prove its reality by
feeling its satiny texture against my skin.

I had to look at what was underneath for a long time. My eyes saw it, but it
took awhile for my mind to catch up. It was an envelope, carefully wrapped in a
plastic bag to keep away the damp. My name was written across the front in
Andy's clear script.

I took the envelope and left the rock where Andy had left it, and Andy's friend
before him.

Dear Red,

If you're reading this, then you're out. One way or another, you're out. And f
you've followed along this far, you might be willing to come a little further.

I think you remember the name of the town, don't you? I could use a good man
to help me get my project on wheels. Meantime, have a drink on me-and do think
it over. I will be keeping an eye out for you. Remember that hope is a good
thing, Red, maybe the best of things, and no good thing ever dies. I will be
hoping that this letter finds you, and finds you well.

Your friend,
Peter Stevens

I didn't read that letter in the field. A kind of terror had come over me, a
need to get away from there before I was seen. To make what may be an
appropriate pun, I was in terror of being apprehended.

I went back to my room and read it there, with the smell of old men's dinners
drifting up the stairwell to me-Beefaroni, RiceaRoni, NoodleRoni. You can bet
that whatever the old folks of America, the ones on fixed incomes, are eating
tonight, it almost certainly ends in “roni.”

I opened the envelope and read the letter and then I put my head in my arms and
cried. With the letter there were twenty new fifty dollar bills.


And here I am in the Brewster Hotel, technically a fugitive from justice

again-parole violation is my crime. No one's going to throw up any roadblocks to
catch a criminal wanted on that charge, I guess-wondering what I should do now.
I have this manuscript. I have a small piece of luggage about the size of a
doctor's bag that holds everything I own. I have nineteen fifties, four tens, a

five, three ones, and assorted change. I broke one of the fifties to buy this
tablet of paper and a deck of smokes.

Wondering what I should do.

But there's really no question. It always comes down to just two choices. Get
busy living or get busy dying.

First I'm going to put this manuscript back in my bag. Then I'm going to buckle
it up, grab my coat, go downstairs, and check out of this fleabag. Then I'm
going to walk uptown to a bar and put that five-dollar bill down in front of the
bartender and ask him to bring me two straight shots of Jack Daniel's-one for me
and  one for Andy Dufresne. Other than a beer or two, they'll be the first 
drinks
I've taken as a free man since 1938. Then I am going to tip the bartender a

dollar and thank him kindly. I will leave the bar and walk up Spring Street to

the Greyhound terminal there and buy a bus ticket to El Paso by way of New York
City. When I get to El Paso, I'm going to buy a ticket to McNary. And when I get
to McNary, I guess I'll have a chance to find out if an old crook like me can

find a way to float across the border and into Mexico.

Sure I remember the name. Zihuatanejo. A name like that is just too pretty to
forget.

I find I am excited, so excited I can hardly hold the pencil in my trembling
hand. I think it is the excitement that only a free man can feel, a free man
starting a long journey whose conclusion is uncertain.

I hope Andy is down there.

I hope I can make it across the border.

I hope to see my friend and shake his hand.

I hope the Pacific is as blue as it has been in my dreams.
I hope.

