A few words about the sisters.

In a lot of pens they are known as bull queers or jailhouse susies-just lately
the term in fashion is "killer queens." But in Shawshank they were always the
sisters. I don't know why, but other than the name I guess there was no
difference.

It comes as no surprise to most these days that there's a lot of buggery going
on inside the walls-except to some of the new fish, maybe, who have the

misfortune to be young, slim, good-looking, and unwary-but homosexuality, like
straight sex, comes in a hundred different shapes and forms. There are men who
can't stand to be without sex of some kind and turn to another man to keep from
going crazy. Usually what follows is an arrangement between two fundamentally
heterosexual men, although I've sometimes wondered if they are quite as
heterosexual as they thought they were going to be when they get back to their
wives or their girlfriends.

There are also men who get "turned" in prison. In the current parlance they "go
gay," or "come out of the closet. " Mostly (but not always) they play the
female, and their favors are competed for fiercely.

And then there are the sisters.

They are to prison society what the rapist is to the society outside the walls.
They're usually long-timers, doing hard bullets for brutal crimes. Their prey is
the young, the weak, and the inexperienced . . . or, as in the case of Andy

Dufresne, the weak-looking. Their hunting grounds are the showers, the cramped,
tunnel-like areaway behind the industrial washers in the laundry, sometimes the
infirmary. On more than one occasion rape has occurred in the closet-sized
projection booth behind the auditorium. Most often what the sisters take by

force they could have had for free, if they wanted it that way; those who have
been turned always seem to have "crushes" on one sister or another, like teenage
girls with their Sinatras, Presleys, or Redfords. But for the sisters, the joy

has always been in taking it by force . . . and I guess it always will be.

Because of his small size and fair good looks (and maybe also because of that
very quality of self-possession I had admired), the sisters were after Andy from
the day he walked in. If this was some kind of fairy story, I'd tell you that
Andy fought the good fight until they left him alone. I wish I could say that,
but     I can't. Prison is no fairy-tale world.

The first time for him was in the shower less than three days after he joined
our happy Shawshank family. Just a lot of slap and tickle that time, I
understand. They like to size you up before they make their real move, like


jackals finding out if the prey is as weak and hamstrung as it looks.

Andy punched back and bloodied the lip of a big, hulking sister named Bogs
Diamond-gone these many years since to who knows where. A guard broke it up
before it could go any further, but Bogs promised to get him-and Bogs did.

The second time was behind the washers in the laundry. A lot has gone on in that
long, dusty, and narrow space over the years; the guards know about it and just
let it be. It's dim and littered with bags of washing and bleaching compound,
drums of Hexlite catalyst, as harmless as salt if your hands are dry, murderous

as battery acid if they're wet. The guards don't like to go back there. There's

no room to maneuver, and one of the first things they teach them when they come
to work in a place like this is to never let the cons get you in a place where

you can't back up.

Bogs wasn't there that day, but Henley Backus, who had been washroom foreman
down there since 1922, told me that four of his friends were. Andy held them at

bay for awhile with a scoop of burning Hexlite, threatening to throw it in 
their eyes if
they came any closer, but he tripped trying to back around one of the big Washex
fourpockets. That was all it took. They were on him.

I guess the phrase gang-rape is one that doesn't change much from one generation
to the next. That's what they did to him, those four sisters. They bent him 
over

a gear-box and one of them held a Phillips screwdriver to his temple while they
gave him the business. It rips you up some, but not bad-am I speaking from
personal experience, you ask?-I only wish I weren't. You bleed for awhile. If

you don't want some clown asking you if you just started your period, you wad up
a bunch of toilet paper and keep it down the back of your underwear until it

stops. The bleeding really is like a menstrual flow; it keeps up for two, maybe
three days, a slow trickle. Then it stops. No harm done, unless they've done
something even more unnatural to you. No physical harm done but rape is rape,
and eventually you have to look at your face in the mirror again and decide what
to make of yourself.

Andy went through that alone, the way he went through everything alone in those
days. He must have come to the conclusion that others before him had come to,
namely, that then are only two ways to deal with the sisters: fight them and get
taken   or just get taken.

He decided to fight. When Bogs and two of his buddies cam after him a week or so
after the laundry incident ("I heard ya go broke in," Bogs said, according to

Ernie, who was around at the time), Andy slugged it out with them. He broke the
nose of fellow named Rooster MacBride, a heavy-gutted farmer who was is for
beating his stepdaughter to death. Rooster died in here, I'm happy to add.

They took him, all three of them. When it was done, Rooster and the other 
egg-it


might have been Pete Verness, but I'm no completely sure-forced Andy down to his
knees. Bogs Diamond stepped in front of him. He had a pearl-handled razor in
those day with the words Diamond Pearl engraved on both sides of the grip He
opened it and said, "I'm gonna open my fly now, mister man and you're going to
swallow what I give you to swallow. And when you done swallowed mine, you're
gonna swallow Rooster's. I guess you done broke his nose and I think he ought to
have something to pay for it."

Andy said, "Anything of yours that you stick in my mouth you're going to lose
it."

Bogs looked at Andy like he was crazy, Ernie said.

"No," he told Andy, talking to him slowly, like Andy was stupid kid. "You didn't
understand what I said. You do anything like that and I'll put all eight inches

of this steel into your ear. Get it?"

"I understood what you said. I don't think you understood me. I'm going to bite
whatever you stick into my mouth. You can put that razor into my brain, I guess,
but you should know that sudden serious brain injury causes the victim to
simultaneously urinate, defecate . . . and bite down."

He looked up at Bogs, smiling that little smile of his, old Ernie said, as if
the three of them had been discussing stocks and bonds with him instead of

throwing it to him just as hard as they could. Just as if he was wearing one of
his three-piece bankers' suits instead of kneeling on a dirty broom-closet floor
with his pants around his ankles and blood trickling down the insides of his
thighs.

"In fact," he went on, "I understand that the bite-reflex is sometimes so strong
that the victim's jaws have to be pried open with a crowbar or a jackhandle."
Bogs didn't put anything in Andy's mouth that night in late February of 1948,
and neither did Rooster MacBride, and so far as I know, no one else ever did,
either. What the three of them did was to beat Andy within an inch of his life,
and all four of them ended up doing a jolt in solitary. Andy and Rooster
MacBride went by way of the infirmary.

How many times did that particular crew have at him? I don't know. I think
Rooster lost his taste fairly early on -- being in nosesplints for a month can 
do
that to a fellow -- and Bogs Diamond left off that summer, all at once.

That was a strange thing. Bogs was found in his cell, badly beaten, one morning
in early June, when he didn't show up in the breakfast nose-count. He wouldn't
say who had done it, or how they had gotten to him, but being in my business, I
know that a screw can be bribed to do almost anything except get a gun for an


inmate. They didn't make big salaries then, and they don't now. And in those
days there was no electronic locking system, no closed-circuit TV, no

master-switches which controlled whole areas of the prison. Back in 1948, each
cellblock had its own turnkey. A guard could have been bribed real easy to let
someone-maybe two or three someones-into the block, and, yes, even into
Diamond's cell.

Of course a job like that would have cost a lot of money. Not by outside
standards, no. Prison economics are on a smaller scale. When you've been in here
awhile, a dollar bill in your hand looks like a twenty did outside. My guess is
that,       if Bogs was done, it cost someone a serious piece of change-fifteen 
bucks,
we'll say, for the turnkey, and two or three apiece for each of the lump-up

guys.

I'm not saying it was Andy Dufresne, but I do know that he brought in five
hundred dollars when he came, and he was a banker in the straight world-a man
who understands better than the rest of us the ways in which money can become
power.

And I know this: after the beating-the three broken ribs, the hemorrhaged eye,
the sprained back, and the dislocated hip-Bogs Diamond left Andy alone. In fact,
after that he left everyone pretty much alone. He got to be like a high wind in
the summertime, all bluster and no bite. You could say, in fact, that he turned
into a "weak sister."

That was the end of Bogs Diamond, a man who might eventually have killed Andy if
Andy hadn't taken steps to prevent it (if it was him who took the steps). But it
wasn't the end of Andy's trouble with the sisters. There was a little hiatus,

and then it began again, although not so hard or so often. Jackals like easy
prey, and there were easier pickings around than Andy Dufresne.

He always fought them, that's what I remember. He knew, I guess, that if you let
them have at you even once without fighting, it got that much easier to let them
have their way without fighting next time. So Andy would turn up with bruises on
his face every once in awhile, and there was the matter of the two broken

fingers six or eight months after Diamond's beating. Oh yes-and sometime in late
1949, the man landed in the infirmary with a broken cheekbone that was probably
the result of someone swinging a nice chunk of pipe with the business-end
wrapped in flannel. He always fought back, and as a result, he did his time in
solitary. But I don't think solitary was the hardship for Andy that it was for

some men. He got along with himself.

The sisters was something he adjusted himself to-and then, in 1950, it stopped
almost completely. That is a part of my story that I'll get to in due time.
