In the fall of 1948, Andy met me one morning in the exercise yard and asked me
if I could get him half a dozen rock-blankets.

"What the hell are those?" I asked.

He told me that was just what rockhounds called them; they were polishing cloths
about the size of dishtowels. They were heavily padded, with a smooth side and a
rough side-the smooth side like fine-grained sandpaper, the rough side almost as
abrasive as industrial steel wool (Andy also kept a box of that in his cell,

although he didn't get it from me-I imagine he kited it from the prison
laundry).

I told him I thought we could do business on those, and I ended up getting them
from the very same rock-and-gem shop where I'd arranged to get the rock-hammer.

This time I charged Andy my usual ten per cent and not a penny more. I didn't
see anything lethal or even dangerous in a dozen 7" x 7" squares of padded
cloth. Rock-blankets, indeed.

It was about five months later that Andy asked if I could get him Rita Hayworth.
That conversation took place in the auditorium, during a movie-show. Nowadays we
get the movie-shows once or twice a week, but back then the shows were a monthly
event. Usually the movies we got had a morally uplifting message to them, and

this one, The Lost Weekend, was no different. The moral was that it's dangerous
to drink. It was a moral we could take some comfort in.

Andy maneuvered to get next to me, and about halfway through the show he leaned
a little closer and asked if I could get him Rita Hayworth. I'll tell you the

truth, it kind of tickled me. He was usually cool, calm, and collected, but that
night he was jumpy as hell, almost embarrassed, as if he was asking me to get
him  a load of Trojans or one of those sheepskin-lined gadgets that are supposed
to "enhance your solitary pleasure," as the magazines put it. He seemed
overcharged, a man on the verge of blowing his radiator.

"I can get her," I said. "No sweat, calm down. You want the big one or the
little one?" At that time Rita was my best girl (a few years before it had been
Betty Grable) and she came in two sizes. For a buck you could get the little
Rita. For two-fifty you could have the big Rita, four feet high and all woman.
"The big one," he said, not looking at me. I tell you, he was a hot sketch that


night. He was blushing just like a kid trying to get into a kootch show with his
big brother's draft-card. "Can you do it?"

"Take it easy, sure I can. Does a bear shit in the woods?" The audience was
applauding and catcalling as the bugs came out of the walls to get Ray Milland,
who was having a bad case of the DT's

"How soon?"

"A week. Maybe less."

"Okay. " But he sounded disappointed, as if he had been hoping had one stuffed
down my pants right then. "How much?"

I quoted him the wholesale price. I could afford to give him this one at cost;
he'd been a good customer, what with his rock-hammer and his rock-blankets.

Furthermore, he'd been a good boy-o more than one night when he was having his
problems with Bogs Rooster, and the rest, I wondered how long it would be before
h used the rock-hammer to crack someone's head open.

Posters are a big part of my business, just behind the booze an, cigarettes,
usually half a step ahead of the reefer. In the sixties the business exploded in
every direction, with a lot of people wanting funky hang-ups like Jimi Hendrix,
Bob Dylan, that Easy Rider poster. But mostly it's girls; one pin-up queen after
another.

A few days after Andy spoke to me, a laundry driver I did business with back
then brought in better than sixty posters, most of them Rita Hayworths. You may
even remember the picture; sure do. Rita is dressed-sort of-in a bathing suit,

one hand behind her head, her eyes half-closed, those full, sulky red lips
parted. They called it Rita Hayworth, but they might as well have called it
Woman in Heat.

The prison administration knows about the black market, in case you were
wondering. Sure they do. They probably know almost much about my business as I
do myself. They live with it because they know that a prison is like a big

pressure-cooker, and there has to be vents somewhere to let off steam. They make
the occasion; bust, and I've done time in solitary a time or three over the 
year

but when it's something like posters, they wink. Live and let live And when a
big Rita Hayworth went up in some fishie's cell, the assumption was that it came
in the mail from a friend or a relative. Of course all the care-packages from

friends and relatives are opened and the contents inventoried, but who goes back
and rechecks the inventory sheets for something as harmless as a Rita Hayworth
or Ava Gardner pin-up? When you're in a pressure cooker you learn to live and 
let
live or somebody will carve you a brand-new mouth just above the Adam's apple.


You learn to make allowances.

It was Ernie again who took the poster up to Andy's cell, 14, from my own, 6.
And it was Ernie who brought back the note, written in Andy's careful hand, just
one word: "Thanks."

A little while later, as they filed us out for morning chow, I glanced into his

cell and saw Rita over his bunk in all her swimsuited glory, one hand behind her
head, her eyes half-closed, those soft, satiny lips parted. It was over his bunk
where he could look at her nights, after lights-out, in the glow of the arc
sodium lights in the exercise yard.

But in the bright morning sunlight, there were dark slashes across her face-the
shadow of the bars on his single slit window.